Then don't talk in that wrong manner,’ says Mr Bucket, mollified
again. ‘Why do you do it?’

‘It's brought into my head, master,’ returns the woman, her eyes filling
with tears, ‘when I look down at the child lying so. If it was never to
wake no more, you'd think me mad, I should take on so. I know that
very well. I was with Jenny when she lost hers--warn't I, Jenny?--and
I know how she grieved. But look around you at this place. Look at
them,’ glancing at the sleepers on the ground. ‘Look at the boy you're
waiting for, who's gone out to do me a good turn. Think of the children
that your business lays with often and often, and that YOU see grow
up!’

‘Well, well,’ says Mr Bucket, ‘you train him respectable, and he'll be a
comfort to you, and look after you in your old age, you know.’

T mean to try hard,’ she answers, wiping her eyes. ‘But I have been a-
thinking, being over-tired to-night and not well with the ague, of all
the many things that'll come in his way. My master will be against it,
and he'll be beat, and see me beat, and made to fear his home, and
perhaps to stray wild. If I work for him ever so much, and ever so
hard, there's no one to help me; and if he should be turned bad 'spite
of all I could do, and the time should come when I should sit by him
in his sleep, made hard and changed, an't it likely I should think of
him as he lies in my lap now and wish he had died as Jenny's child
died!’

‘There, there!’ says Jenny. ‘Liz, you're tired and ill. Let me take him.’

In doing so, she displaces the mother's dress, but quickly readjusts it
over the wounded and bruised bosom where the baby has been lying.

It's my dead child,’ says Jenny, walking up and down as she nurses,
‘that makes me love this child so dear, and it's my dead child that
makes her love it so dear too, as even to think of its being taken away
from her now. While she thinks that, I think what fortune would I give
to have my darling back. But we mean the same thing, if we knew how
to say it, us two mothers does in our poor hearts!’

As Mr Snagsby blows his nose and coughs his cough of sympathy, a
step is heard without. Mr Bucket throws his light into the doorway
and says to Mr Snagsby, ‘Now, what do you say to Toughy? Will HE
do?’

‘That's Jo,’ says Mr Snagsby.

Jo stands amazed in the disk of light, like a ragged figure in a magic-
lantern, trembling to think that he has offended against the law in not
having moved on far enough. Mr Snagsby, however, giving him the
consolatory assurance, ‘t's only a job you will be paid for, Jo,’ he
recovers; and on being taken outside by Mr Bucket for a little private
confabulation, tells his tale satisfactorily, though out of breath.

T have squared it with the lad,’ says Mr Bucket, returning, ‘and it's all
right. Now, Mr Snagsby, we're ready for you.’

First, Jo has to complete his errand of good nature by handing over
the physic he has been to get, which he delivers with the laconic
verbal direction that ‘it's to be all took d'rectly.’ Secondly, Mr Snagsby
has to lay upon the table half a crown, his usual panacea for an
immense variety of afflictions. Thirdly, Mr Bucket has to take Jo by
the arm a little above the elbow and walk him on before him, without
which observance neither the Tough Subject nor any other Subject
could be professionally conducted to Lincoln's Inn Fields. These
arrangements completed, they give the women good night and come
out once more into black and foul Tom-all-Alone's.

By the noisome ways through which they descended into that pit, they
gradually emerge from it, the crowd flitting, and whistling, and
skulking about them until they come to the verge, where restoration of
the bull's-eyes is made to Darby. Here the crowd, like a concourse of
imprisoned demons, turns back, yelling, and is seen no more.
Through the clearer and fresher streets, never so clear and fresh to Mr
Snagsby's mind as now, they walk and ride until they come to Mr
Tulkinghorn's gate.

As they ascend the dim stairs (Mr Tulkinghorn's chambers being on
the first floor), Mr Bucket mentions that he has the key of the outer
door in his pocket and that there is no need to ring. For a man so
expert in most things of that kind, Bucket takes time to open the door
and makes some noise too. It may be that he sounds a note of
preparation.

Howbeit, they come at last into the hall, where a lamp is burning, and
so into Mr Tulkinghorn's usual room--the room where he drank his
old wine to-night. He is not there, but his two old-fashioned
candlesticks are, and the room is tolerably light.

Mr Bucket, still having his professional hold of Jo and appearing to
Mr Snagsby to possess an unlimited number of eyes, makes a little
way into this room, when Jo starts and stops.

‘What's the matter?’ says Bucket in a whisper.

‘There she is!’ cries Jo.
‘Who!’

‘The lady!’

A female figure, closely veiled, stands in the middle of the room, where
the light falls upon it. It is quite still and silent. The front of the figure
is towards them, but it takes no notice of their entrance and remains
like a statue.

‘Now, tell me,’ says Bucket aloud, ‘how you know that to be the lady.’

T know the wale,’ replies Jo, staring, ‘and the bonnet, and the gownd.’

‘Be quite sure of what you say, Tough,’ returns Bucket, narrowly
observant of him. ‘Look again.’

T am a-looking as hard as ever I can look,’ says Jo with starting eyes,
‘and that there's the wale, the bonnet, and the gownd.’

‘What about those rings you told me of?’ asks Bucket.

‘A-sparkling all over here,’ says Jo, rubbing the fingers of his left hand
on the knuckles of his right without taking his eyes from the figure.
The figure removes the right-hand glove and shows the hand.

‘Now, what do you say to that?’ asks Bucket.

Jo shakes his head. ‘Not rings a bit like them. Not a hand like that.’

‘What are you talking of?’ says Bucket, evidently pleased though, and
well pleased too.

‘Hand was a deal whiter, a deal delicater, and a deal smaller,’ returns
Jo.

‘Why, you'll tell me I'm my own mother next,’ says Mr Bucket. ‘Do you
recollect the lady's voice?’

T think I does,’ says Jo.

The figure speaks. ‘Was it at all like this? I will speak as long as you
like if you are not sure. Was it this voice, or at all like this voice?’

Jo looks aghast at Mr Bucket. ‘Not a bit!’

‘Then, what,’ retorts that worthy, pointing to the figure, ‘did you say it
was the lady for?’
‘Cos,’ says Jo with a perplexed stare but without being at all shaken
in his certainty, ‘cos that there's the wale, the bonnet, and the gownd.
It is her and it an't her. It an't her hand, nor yet her rings, nor yet her
woice. But that there's the wale, the bonnet, and the gownd, and
they're wore the same way wot she wore 'em, and it's her height wot
she wos, and she giv me a sov'ring and hooked it.’

‘Well!’ says Mr Bucket slightly, ‘we haven't got much good out of YOU.
But, however, here's five shillings for you. Take care how you spend it,
and don't get yourself into trouble.’ Bucket stealthily tells the coins
from one hand into the other like counters--which is a way he has, his
principal use of them being in these games of skill--and then puts
them, in a little pile, into the boy's hand and takes him out to the
door, leaving Mr Snagsby, not by any means comfortable under these
mysterious circumstances, alone with the veiled figure. But on Mr
Tulkinghorn's coming into the room, the veil is raised and a
sufficiently good-looking Frenchwoman is revealed, though her
expression is something of the intensest.

Thank you, Mademoiselle Hortense,’ says Mr Tulkinghorn with his
usual equanimity. T will give you no further trouble about this little

wager.’

‘You will do me the kindness to remember, sir, that I am not at
present placed?’ says mademoiselle.

‘Certainly, certainly!’

‘And to confer upon me the favour of your distinguished
recommendation?’

‘By all means, Mademoiselle Hortense.’

‘A word from Mr Tulkinghorn is so powerful.’

‘Tt shall not be wanting, mademoiselle.’

‘Receive the assurance of my devoted gratitude, dear sir.’

‘Good night.’

Mademoiselle goes out with an air of native gentility; and Mr Bucket,
to whom it is, on an emergency, as natural to be groom of the
ceremonies as it is to be anything else, shows her downstairs, not

without gallantry.

‘Well, Bucket?’ quoth Mr Tulkinghorn on his return.
It's all squared, you see, as I squared it myself, sir. There an't a doubt
that it was the other one with this one's dress on. The boy was exact
respecting colours and everything. Mr Snagsby, I promised you as a
man that he should be sent away all right. Don't say it wasn't done!’

‘You have kept your word, sir,’ returns the stationer; ‘and if I can be of
no further use, Mr Tulkinghorn, I think, as my little woman will be
getting anxious--’

Thank you, Snagsby, no further use,’ says Mr Tulkinghorn. T am
quite indebted to you for the trouble you have taken already.’

‘Not at all, sir. I wish you good night.’

‘You see, Mr Snagsby,’ says Mr Bucket, accompanying him to the door
and shaking hands with him over and over again, ‘what I like in you is
that you're a man it's of no use pumping; that's what YOU are. When
you know you have done a right thing, you put it away, and it's done
with and gone, and there's an end of it. That's what YOU do.’

‘That is certainly what I endeavour to do, sir,’ returns Mr Snagsby.

‘No, you don't do yourself justice. It an't what you endeavour to do,’
says Mr Bucket, shaking hands with him and blessing him in the
tenderest manner, ‘it's what you DO. That's what I estimate in a man
in your way of business.’

Mr Snagsby makes a suitable response and goes homeward so
confused by the events of the evening that he is doubtful of his being
awake and out--doubtful of the reality of the streets through which he
goes--doubtful of the reality of the moon that shines above him. He is
presently reassured on these subjects by the unchallengeable reality
of Mrs Snagsby, sitting up with her head in a perfect beehive of curl-
papers and night-cap, who has dispatched Guster to the police-station
with official intelligence of her husband's being made away with, and
who within the last two hours has passed through every stage of
swooning with the greatest decorum. But as the little woman feelingly
says, many thanks she gets for it!
Chapter XXIII - Esther's Narrative

We came home from Mr Boythorn's after six pleasant weeks. We were
often in the park and in the woods and seldom passed the lodge where
we had taken shelter without looking in to speak to the keeper's wife;
but we saw no more of Lady Dedlock, except at church on Sundays.
There was company at Chesney Wold; and although several beautiful
faces surrounded her, her face retained the same influence on me as
at first. I do not quite know even now whether it was painful or
pleasurable, whether it drew me towards her or made me shrink from
her. I think I admired her with a kind of fear, and I know that in her
presence my thoughts always wandered back, as they had done at
first, to that old time of my life.

I had a fancy, on more than one of these Sundays, that what this lady
so curiously was to me, I was to her--I mean that I disturbed her
thoughts as she influenced mine, though in some different way. But
when I stole a glance at her and saw her so composed and distant and
unapproachable, I felt this to be a foolish weakness. Indeed, I felt the
whole state of my mind in reference to her to be weak and
unreasonable, and I remonstrated with myself about it as much as |
could.

One incident that occurred before we quitted Mr Boythorn's house, I
had better mention in this place.

I was walking in the garden with Ada and when I was told that some
one wished to see me. Going into the breakfast-room where this
person was waiting, I found it to be the French maid who had cast off
her shoes and walked through the wet grass on the day when it
thundered and lightened.

‘Mademoiselle,’ she began, looking fixedly at me with her too-eager
eyes, though otherwise presenting an agreeable appearance and
speaking neither with boldness nor servility, I have taken a great
liberty in coming here, but you know how to excuse it, being so
amiable, mademoiselle.’

‘No excuse is necessary,’ I returned, ‘if you wish to speak to me.’

That is my desire, mademoiselle. A thousand thanks for the
permission. I have your leave to speak. Is it not?’ she said in a quick,
natural way.

‘Certainly,’ said I.

‘Mademoiselle, you are so amiable! Listen then, if you please. I have
left my Lady. We could not agree. My Lady is so high, so very high.
Pardon! Mademoiselle, you are right!’ Her quickness anticipated what
I might have said presently but as yet had only thought. It is not for
me to come here to complain of my Lady. But I say she is so high, so
very high. I will not say a word more. All the world knows that.’

‘Go on, if you please,’ said I.

‘Assuredly; mademoiselle, I am thankful for your politeness.
Mademoiselle, I have an inexpressible desire to find service with a
young lady who is good, accomplished, beautiful. You are good,
accomplished, and beautiful as an angel. Ah, could I have the honour
of being your domestic!’

T am sorry--’ I began.

Do not dismiss me so soon, mademoiselle!’ she said with an
involuntary contraction of her fine black eyebrows. ‘Let me hope a
moment! Mademoiselle, I know this service would be more retired
than that which I have quitted. Well! I wish that. I know this service
would be less distinguished than that which I have quitted. Well! I
wish that, I know that I should win less, as to wages here. Good. I am
content.’

T assure you,’ said I, quite embarrassed by the mere idea of having
such an attendant, ‘that I keep no maid--’

‘Ah, mademoiselle, but why not? Why not, when you can have one so
devoted to you! Who would be enchanted to serve you; who would be
so true, so zealous, and so faithful every day! Mademoiselle, I wish
with all my heart to serve you. Do not speak of money at present. Take
me as I am. For nothing!’

She was so singularly earnest that I drew back, almost afraid of her.
Without appearing to notice it, in her ardour she still pressed herself
upon me, speaking in a rapid subdued voice, though always with a
certain grace and propriety.

‘Mademoiselle, I come from the South country where we are quick and
where we like and dislike very strong. My Lady was too high for me; I
was too high for her. It is done--past--finished! Receive me as your
domestic, and I will serve you well. I will do more for you than you
figure to yourself now. Chut! Mademoiselle, I will-- no matter, I will do
my utmost possible in all things. If you accept my service, you will not
repent it. Mademoiselle, you will not repent it, and I will serve you
well. You don't know how well!’

There was a lowering energy in her face as she stood looking at me
while I explained the impossibility of my engaging her (without
thinking it necessary to say how very little I desired to do so), which
seemed to bring visibly before me some woman from the streets of
Paris in the reign of terror.

She heard me out without interruption and then said with her pretty
accent and in her mildest voice, ‘Hey, mademoiselle, I have received
my answer! I am sorry of it. But I must go elsewhere and seek what I
have not found here. Will you graciously let me kiss your hand?’

She looked at me more intently as she took it, and seemed to take
note, with her momentary touch, of every vein in it. I fear I surprised
you, mademoiselle, on the day of the storm?’ she said with a parting
curtsy.

I confessed that she had surprised us all.

T took an oath, mademoiselle,’ she said, smiling, ‘and I wanted to
stamp it on my mind so that I might keep it faithfully. And I will!
Adieu, mademoiselle!’ So ended our conference, which I was very glad
to bring to a close. I supposed she went away from the village, for I
saw her no more; and nothing else occurred to disturb our tranquil
summer pleasures until six weeks were out and we returned home as
I began just now by saying.

At that time, and for a good many weeks after that time, Richard was
constant in his visits. Besides coming every Saturday or Sunday and
remaining with us until Monday morning, he sometimes rode out on
horseback unexpectedly and passed the evening with us and rode
back again early next day. He was as vivacious as ever and told us he
was very industrious, but I was not easy in my mind about him. It
appeared to me that his industry was all misdirected. I could not find
that it led to anything but the formation of delusive hopes in
connexion with the suit already the pernicious cause of so much
sorrow and ruin. He had got at the core of that mystery now, he told
us, and nothing could be plainer than that the will under which he
and Ada were to take I don't know how many thousands of pounds
must be finally established if there were any sense or justice in the
Court of Chancery--but oh, what a great IF that sounded in my ears--
and that this happy conclusion could not be much longer delayed. He
proved this to himself by all the weary arguments on that side he had
read, and every one of them sunk him deeper in the infatuation. He
had even begun to haunt the court. He told us how he saw Miss Flite
there daily, how they talked together, and how he did her little
kindnesses, and how, while he laughed at her, he pitied her from his
heart. But he never thought--never, my poor, dear, sanguine Richard,
capable of so much happiness then, and with such better things
before him-- what a fatal link was riveting between his fresh youth
and her faded age, between his free hopes and her caged birds, and
her hungry garret, and her wandering mind.

Ada loved him too well to mistrust him much in anything he said or
did, and my guardian, though he frequently complained of the east
wind and read more than usual in the growlery, preserved a strict
silence on the subject. So I thought one day when I went to London to
meet Caddy Jellyby, at her solicitation, I would ask Richard to be in
waiting for me at the coach-office, that we might have a little talk
together. I found him there when I arrived, and we walked away arm
in arm.

‘Well, Richard,’ said I as soon as I could begin to be grave with him,
‘are you beginning to feel more settled now?’

‘Oh, yes, my dear!’ returned Richard. ‘'m all right enough.’

‘But settled?’ said I.

‘How do you mean, settled?’ returned Richard with his gay laugh.
‘Settled in the law,’ said I.

‘Oh, aye,’ replied Richard, ‘I'm all right enough.’

‘You said that before, my dear Richard.’

‘And you don't think it's an answer, eh? Well! Perhaps it's not.
Settled? You mean, do I feel as if I were settling down?’

Yes.’

‘Why, no, I can't say I am settling down,’ said Richard, strongly
emphasizing ‘down,’ as if that expressed the difficulty, ‘because one
can't settle down while this business remains in such an unsettled
state. When I say this business, of course I mean the-- forbidden
subject.’

‘Do you think it will ever be in a settled state?’ said I.
‘Not the least doubt of it,’ answered Richard.

We walked a little way without speaking, and presently Richard
addressed me in his frankest and most feeling manner, thus: ‘My dear
Esther, I understand you, and I wish to heaven I were a more constant
sort of fellow. I don't mean constant to Ada, for I love her dearly--
better and better every day--but constant to myself. (Somehow, I mean
something that I can't very well express, but you'll make it out.) If I
were a more constant sort of fellow, I should have held on either to
Badger or to Kenge and Carboy like grim death, and should have
begun to be steady and systematic by this time, and shouldn't be in
debt, and--’

‘ARE you in debt, Richard?’

‘Yes,’ said Richard, ‘I am a little so, my dear. Also, I have taken rather
too much to billiards and that sort of thing. Now the murder's out;
you despise me, Esther, don't you?’

‘You know I don't,’ said I.

‘You are kinder to me than I often am to myself,’ he returned. ‘My dear
Esther, I am a very unfortunate dog not to be more settled, but how
CAN I be more settled? If you lived in an unfinished house, you
couldn't settle down in it; if you were condemned to leave everything
you undertook unfinished, you would find it hard to apply yourself to
anything; and yet that's my unhappy case. I was born into this
unfinished contention with all its chances and changes, and it began
to unsettle me before I quite knew the difference between a suit at law
and a suit of clothes; and it has gone on unsettling me ever since; and
here I am now, conscious sometimes that I am but a worthless fellow
to love my confiding cousin Ada.’

We were in a solitary place, and he put his hands before his eyes and
sobbed as he said the words.

‘Oh, Richard!’ said I. Do not be so moved. You have a noble nature,
and Ada's love may make you worthier every day.’

T know, my dear,’ he replied, pressing my arm, T know all that. You
mustn't mind my being a little soft now, for I have had all this upon
my mind for a long time, and have often meant to speak to you, and
have sometimes wanted opportunity and sometimes courage. I know
what the thought of Ada ought to do for me, but it doesn't do it. 1am
too unsettled even for that. I love her most devotedly, and yet I do her
wrong, in doing myself wrong, every day and hour. But it can't last for
ever. We shall come on for a final hearing and get judgment in our
favour, and then you and Ada shall see what I can really be!’

It had given me a pang to hear him sob and see the tears start out
between his fingers, but that was infinitely less affecting to me than
the hopeful animation with which he said these words.

T have looked well into the papers, Esther. I have been deep in them
for months,’ he continued, recovering his cheerfulness in a moment,
‘and you may rely upon it that we shall come out triumphant. As to
years of delay, there has been no want of them, heaven knows! And
there is the greater probability of our bringing the matter to a speedy
close; in fact, it's on the paper now. It will be all right at last, and then
you shall see!’

Recalling how he had just now placed Messrs. Kenge and Carboy in
the same category with Mr Badger, I asked him when he intended to
be articled in Lincoln's Inn.

‘There again! I think not at all, Esther,’ he returned with an effort. 1
fancy I have had enough of it. Having worked at Jarndyce and
Jarndyce like a galley slave, I have slaked my thirst for the law and
satisfied myself that I shouldn't like it. Besides, I find it unsettles me
more and more to be so constantly upon the scene of action. So what,’
continued Richard, confident again by this time, ‘do I naturally turn
my thoughts to?’

T can't imagine,’ said I.

‘Don't look so serious,’ returned Richard, ‘because it's the best thing I
can do, my dear Esther, I am certain. It's not as if I wanted a
profession for life. These proceedings will come to a termination, and
then I am provided for. No. I look upon it as a pursuit which is in its
nature more or less unsettled, and therefore suited to my temporary
condition--I may say, precisely suited. What is it that I naturally turn
my thoughts to?’

I looked at him and shook my head.
‘What,’ said Richard, in a tone of perfect conviction, ‘but the army!’
‘The army?’ said I.

‘The army, of course. What I have to do is to get a commission; and--
there Iam, you know!’ said Richard.

And then he showed me, proved by elaborate calculations in his
pocket-book, that supposing he had contracted, say, two hundred
pounds of debt in six months out of the army; and that he contracted
no debt at all within a corresponding period in the army--as to which
he had quite made up his mind; this step must involve a saving of
four hundred pounds in a year, or two thousand pounds in five years,
which was a considerable sum. And then he spoke so ingenuously
and sincerely of the sacrifice he made in withdrawing himself for a
time from Ada, and of the earnestness with which he aspired--as in
thought he always did, I know full well--to repay her love, and to
ensure her happiness, and to conquer what was amiss in himself, and
to acquire the very soul of decision, that he made my heart ache
keenly, sorely. For, I thought, how would this end, how could this end,
when so soon and so surely all his manly qualities were touched by
the fatal blight that ruined everything it rested on!

I spoke to Richard with all the earnestness I felt, and all the hope I
could not quite feel then, and implored him for Ada's sake not to put
any trust in Chancery. To all I said, Richard readily assented, riding
over the court and everything else in his easy way and drawing the
brightest pictures of the character he was to settle into--alas, when
the grievous suit should loose its hold upon him! We had a long talk,
but it always came back to that, in substance.

At last we came to Soho Square, where Caddy Jellyby had appointed
to wait for me, as a quiet place in the neighbourhood of Newman
Street. Caddy was in the garden in the centre and hurried out as soon
as I appeared. After a few cheerful words, Richard left us together.

‘Prince has a pupil over the way, Esther,’ said Caddy, ‘and got the key
for us. So if you will walk round and round here with me, we can lock
ourselves in and I can tell you comfortably what I wanted to see your
dear good face about.’

‘Very well, my dear,’ said I. ‘Nothing could be better.’ So Caddy, after
affectionately squeezing the dear good face as she called it, locked the
gate, and took my arm, and we began to walk round the garden very
cosily.

‘You see, Esther,’ said Caddy, who thoroughly enjoyed a little
confidence, ‘after you spoke to me about its being wrong to marry
without Ma's knowledge, or even to keep Ma long in the dark
respecting our engagement--though I don't believe Ma cares much for
me, I must say--I thought it right to mention your opinions to Prince.
In the first place because I want to profit by everything you tell me,
and in the second place because I have no secrets from Prince.’

T hope he approved, Caddy?’

‘Oh, my dear! I assure you he would approve of anything you could
say. You have no idea what an opinion he has of you!’

Indeed!’

‘Esther, it's enough to make anybody but me jealous,’ said Caddy,
laughing and shaking her head; ‘but it only makes me joyful, for you
are the first friend I ever had, and the best friend I ever can have, and
nobody can respect and love you too much to please me.’
Upon my word, Caddy,’ said I, ‘you are in the general conspiracy to
keep me in a good humour. Well, my dear?’

‘Well! I am going to tell you,’ replied Caddy, crossing her hands
confidentially upon my arm. ‘So we talked a good deal about it, and so
I said to Prince, ‘Prince, as Miss Summerson--"

T hope you didn't say 'Miss Summerson'?’

‘No. I didn't!’ cried Caddy, greatly pleased and with the brightest of
faces. I said, 'Esther.' I said to Prince, 'As Esther is decidedly of that
opinion, Prince, and has expressed it to me, and always hints it when
she writes those kind notes, which you are so fond of hearing me read
to you, I am prepared to disclose the truth to Ma whenever you think
proper. And I think, Prince,' said I, 'that Esther thinks that I should
be in a better, and truer, and more honourable position altogether if
you did the same to your papa."

‘Yes, my dear,’ said I. ‘Esther certainly does think so.’

‘So I was right, you see!’ exclaimed Caddy. ‘Well! This troubled Prince
a good deal, not because he had the least doubt about it, but because
he is so considerate of the feelings of old Mr Turveydrop; and he had
his apprehensions that old Mr Turveydrop might break his heart, or
faint away, or be very much overcome in some affecting manner or
other if he made such an announcement. He feared old Mr Turveydrop
might consider it undutiful and might receive too great a shock. For
old Mr Turveydrop's deportment is very beautiful, you know, Esther,’
said Caddy, ‘and his feelings are extremely sensitive.’

‘Are they, my dear?’

‘Oh, extremely sensitive. Prince says so. Now, this has caused my
darling child--I didn't mean to use the expression to you, Esther,’
Caddy apologized, her face suffused with blushes, ‘but I generally call
Prince my darling child.’

I laughed; and Caddy laughed and blushed, and went on.

‘This has caused him, Esther--’

‘Caused whom, my dear?’

‘Oh, you tiresome thing!’ said Caddy, laughing, with her pretty face on
fire. ‘My darling child, if you insist upon it! This has caused him
weeks of uneasiness and has made him delay, from day to day, ina

very anxious manner. At last he said to me, 'Caddy, if Miss
Summerson, who is a great favourite with my father, could be
prevailed upon to be present when I broke the subject, I think I could
do it.. So I promised I would ask you. And I made up my mind,
besides,’ said Caddy, looking at me hopefully but timidly, ‘that if you
consented, I would ask you afterwards to come with me to Ma. This is
what I meant when I said in my note that I had a great favour and a
great assistance to beg of you. And if you thought you could grant it,
Esther, we should both be very grateful.’

‘Let me see, Caddy,’ said I, pretending to consider. ‘Really, I think I
could do a greater thing than that if the need were pressing. I am at
your service and the darling child's, my dear, whenever you like.’

Caddy was quite transported by this reply of mine, being, I believe, as
susceptible to the least kindness or encouragement as any tender
heart that ever beat in this world; and after another turn or two round
the garden, during which she put on an entirely new pair of gloves
and made herself as resplendent as possible that she might do no
avoidable discredit to the Master of Deportment, we went to Newman
Street direct.

Prince was teaching, of course. We found him engaged with a not very
hopeful pupil--a stubborn little girl with a sulky forehead, a deep
voice, and an inanimate, dissatisfied mama--whose case was certainly
not rendered more hopeful by the confusion into which we threw her
preceptor. The lesson at last came to an end, after proceeding as
discordantly as possible; and when the little girl had changed her
shoes and had had her white muslin extinguished in shawls, she was
taken away. After a few words of preparation, we then went in search
of Mr Turveydrop, whom we found, grouped with his hat and gloves,
as a model of deportment, on the sofa in his private apartment--the
only comfortable room in the house. He appeared to have dressed at
his leisure in the intervals of a light collation, and his dressing-case,
brushes, and so forth, all of quite an elegant kind, lay about.

‘Father, Miss Summerson; Miss Jellyby.’

‘Charmed! Enchanted!’ said Mr Turveydrop, rising with his high-
shouldered bow. ‘Permit me!’ Handing chairs. ‘Be seated!’ Kissing the
tips of his left fingers. ‘Overjoyed!’ Shutting his eyes and rolling. “My
little retreat is made a paradise.’ Recomposing himself on the sofa like
the second gentleman in Europe.

‘Again you find us, Miss Summerson,’ said he, ‘using our little arts to
polish, polish! Again the sex stimulates us and rewards us by the
condescension of its lovely presence. It is much in these times (and we
have made an awfully degenerating business of it since the days of his
Royal Highness the Prince Regent--my patron, if | may presume to say
so) to experience that deportment is not wholly trodden under foot by
mechanics. That it can yet bask in the smile of beauty, my dear
madam.’

I said nothing, which I thought a suitable reply; and he took a pinch
of snuff.

‘My dear son,’ said Mr Turveydrop, ‘you have four schools this
afternoon. I would recommend a hasty sandwich.’

‘Thank you, father,’ returned Prince, ‘I will be sure to be punctual. My
dear father, may I beg you to prepare your mind for what I am going to
say?’

‘Good heaven!’ exclaimed the model, pale and aghast as Prince and
Caddy, hand in hand, bent down before him. ‘What is this? Is this
lunacy! Or what is this?’

‘Father,’ returned Prince with great submission, I love this young
lady, and we are engaged.’

‘Engaged!’ cried Mr Turveydrop, reclining on the sofa and shutting out
the sight with his hand. ‘An arrow launched at my brain by my own
child!’

‘We have been engaged for some time, father,’ faltered Prince, ‘and
Miss Summerson, hearing of it, advised that we should declare the
fact to you and was so very kind as to attend on the present occasion.
Miss Jellyby is a young lady who deeply respects you, father.’

Mr Turveydrop uttered a groan.

‘No, pray don't! Pray don't, father,’ urged his son. ‘Miss Jellyby is a
young lady who deeply respects you, and our first desire is to consider
your comfort.’

Mr Turveydrop sobbed.
‘No, pray don't, father!’ cried his son.

‘Boy,’ said Mr Turveydrop, ‘it is well that your sainted mother is
spared this pang. Strike deep, and spare not. Strike home, sir, strike
home!’

‘Pray don't say so, father,’ implored Prince, in tears. Tt goes to my
heart. I do assure you, father, that our first wish and intention is to
consider your comfort. Caroline and I do not forget our duty--what is
my duty is Caroline's, as we have often said together--and with your
approval and consent, father, we will devote ourselves to making your
life agreeable.’

‘Strike home,’ murmured Mr Turveydrop. ‘Strike home!’ But he
seemed to listen, I thought, too.

‘My dear father,’ returned Prince, ‘we well know what little comforts
you are accustomed to and have a right to, and it will always be our
study and our pride to provide those before anything. If you will bless
us with your approval and consent, father, we shall not think of being
married until it is quite agreeable to you; and when we ARE married,
we shall always make you--of course-- our first consideration. You
must ever be the head and master here, father; and we feel how truly
unnatural it would be in us if we failed to know it or if we failed to
exert ourselves in every possible way to please you.’

Mr Turveydrop underwent a severe internal struggle and came upright
on the sofa again with his cheeks puffing over his stiff cravat, a perfect
model of parental deportment.

‘My son!’ said Mr Turveydrop. ‘My children! I cannot resist your
prayer. Be happy!’

His benignity as he raised his future daughter-in-law and stretched
out his hand to his son (who kissed it with affectionate respect and
gratitude) was the most confusing sight I ever saw.

‘My children,’ said Mr Turveydrop, paternally encircling Caddy with
his left arm as she sat beside him, and putting his right hand
gracefully on his hip. ‘My son and daughter, your happiness shall be
my care. I will watch over you. You shall always live with me’--
meaning, of course, I will always live with you--’this house is
henceforth as much yours as mine; consider it your home. May you
long live to share it with me!’

The power of his deportment was such that they really were as much
overcome with thankfulness as if, instead of quartering himself upon
them for the rest of his life, he were making some munificent sacrifice
in their favour.

‘For myself, my children,’ said Mr Turveydrop, I am falling into the
sear and yellow leaf, and it is impossible to say how long the last
feeble traces of gentlemanly deportment may linger in this weaving
and spinning age. But, so long, I will do my duty to society and will
show myself, as usual, about town. My wants are few and simple. My
little apartment here, my few essentials for the toilet, my frugal
morning meal, and my little dinner will suffice. I charge your dutiful
affection with the supply of these requirements, and I charge myself
with all the rest.’

They were overpowered afresh by his uncommon generosity.

‘My son,’ said Mr Turveydrop, ‘for those little points in which you are
deficient--points of deportment, which are born with a man, which
may be improved by cultivation, but can never be originated-- you
may still rely on me. I have been faithful to my post since the days of
his Royal Highness the Prince Regent, and I will not desert it now. No,
my son. If you have ever contemplated your father's poor position with
a feeling of pride, you may rest assured that he will do nothing to
tarnish it. For yourself, Prince, whose character is different (we cannot
be all alike, nor is it advisable that we should), work, be industrious,
earn money, and extend the connexion as much as possible.’

‘That you may depend I will do, dear father, with all my heart,’ replied
Prince.

T have no doubt of it,’ said Mr Turveydrop. ‘Your qualities are not
shining, my dear child, but they are steady and useful. And to both of
you, my children, I would merely observe, in the spirit of a sainted
wooman on whose path I had the happiness of casting, I believe,
SOME ray of light, take care of the establishment, take care of my
simple wants, and bless you both!’

Old Mr Turveydrop then became so very gallant, in honour of the
occasion, that I told Caddy we must really go to Thavies Inn at once if
we were to go at all that day. So we took our departure after a very
loving farewell between Caddy and her betrothed, and during our walk
she was so happy and so full of old Mr Turveydrop's praises that I
would not have said a word in his disparagement for any
consideration.

The house in Thavies Inn had bills in the windows annoucing that it
was to let, and it looked dirtier and gloomier and ghastlier than ever.
The name of poor Mr Jellyby had appeared in the list of bankrupts but
a day or two before, and he was shut up in the dining-room with two
gentlemen and a heap of blue bags, account- books, and papers,
making the most desperate endeavours to understand his affairs.
They appeared to me to be quite beyond his comprehension, for when
Caddy took me into the dining-room by mistake and we came upon Mr
Jellyby in his spectacles, forlornly fenced into a corner by the great
dining-table and the two gentlemen, he seemed to have given up the
whole thing and to be speechless and insensible.

Going upstairs to Mrs Jellyby's room (the children were all screaming
in the kitchen, and there was no servant to be seen), we found that
lady in the midst of a voluminous correspondence, opening, reading,
and sorting letters, with a great accumulation of torn covers on the
floor. She was so preoccupied that at first she did not know me,
though she sat looking at me with that curious, bright-eyed, far-off
look of hers.

‘Ah! Miss Summerson!’ she said at last. I was thinking of something
so different! I hope you are well. I am happy to see you. Mr Jarndyce
and Miss Clare quite well?’

I hoped in return that Mr Jellyby was quite well.

‘Why, not quite, my dear,’ said Mrs Jellyby in the calmest manner. ‘He
has been unfortunate in his affairs and is a little out of spirits.
Happily for me, I am so much engaged that I have no time to think
about it. We have, at the present moment, one hundred and seventy
families, Miss Summerson, averaging five persons in each, either gone
or going to the left bank of the Niger.’

I thought of the one family so near us who were neither gone nor going
to the left bank of the Niger, and wondered how she could be so
placid.

‘YYou have brought Caddy back, I see,’ observed Mrs Jellyby with a
glance at her daughter. ‘It has become quite a novelty to see her here.
She has almost deserted her old employment and in fact obliges me to
employ a boy.’

Tam sure, Ma--’ began Caddy.

‘Now you know, Caddy,’ her mother mildly interposed, ‘that I DO
employ a boy, who is now at his dinner. What is the use of your
contradicting?’

T was not going to contradict, Ma,’ returned Caddy. I was only going
to say that surely you wouldn't have me be a mere drudge all my life.’

T believe, my dear,’ said Mrs Jellyby, still opening her letters, casting
her bright eyes smilingly over them, and sorting them as she spoke,
‘that you have a business example before you in your mother. Besides.
A mere drudge? If you had any sympathy with the destinies of the
human race, it would raise you high above any such idea. But you
have none. I have often told you, Caddy, you have no such sympathy.’

Not if it's Africa, Ma, I have not.’

‘Of course you have not. Now, if I were not happily so much engaged,
Miss Summerson,’ said Mrs Jellyby, sweetly casting her eyes for a
moment on me and considering where to put the particular letter she
had just opened, ‘this would distress and disappoint me. But I have so
much to think of, in connexion with Borrioboola-Gha and it is so
necessary I should concentrate myself that there is my remedy, you

?

See.

As Caddy gave me a glance of entreaty, and as Mrs Jellyby was
looking far away into Africa straight through my bonnet and head, I
thought it a good opportunity to come to the subject of my visit and to
attract Mrs Jellyby's attention.

‘Perhaps,’ I began, ‘you will wonder what has brought me here to
interrupt you.’

T am always delighted to see Miss Summerson,’ said Mrs Jellyby,
pursuing her employment with a placid smile. ‘Though I wish,’ and
she shook her head, ‘she was more interested in the Borrioboolan
project.’

T have come with Caddy,’ said I, ‘because Caddy justly thinks she
ought not to have a secret from her mother and fancies I shall
encourage and aid her (though I am sure I don't know how) in
imparting one.’

‘Caddy,’ said Mrs Jellyby, pausing for a moment in her occupation
and then serenely pursuing it after shaking her head, ‘you are going to
tell me some nonsense.’

Caddy untied the strings of her bonnet, took her bonnet off, and
letting it dangle on the floor by the strings, and crying heartily, said,
‘Ma, I am engaged.’

‘Oh, you ridiculous child!’ observed Mrs Jellyby with an abstracted air
as she looked over the dispatch last opened; ‘what a goose you are!’

T am engaged, Ma,’ sobbed Caddy, ‘to young Mr Turveydrop, at the
academy; and old Mr Turveydrop (who is a very gentlemanly man
indeed) has given his consent, and I beg and pray you'll give us yours,
Ma, because I never could be happy without it. I never, never could!’
sobbed Caddy, quite forgetful of her general complainings and of
everything but her natural affection.

‘YYou see again, Miss Summerson,’ observed Mrs Jellyby serenely,
‘what a happiness it is to be so much occupied as I am and to have
this necessity for self-concentration that I have. Here is Caddy
engaged to a dancing-master's son--mixed up with people who have
no more sympathy with the destinies of the human race than she has
herself! This, too, when Mr Quale, one of the first philanthropists of
our time, has mentioned to me that he was really disposed to be
interested in her!’

‘Ma, I always hated and detested Mr Quale!’ sobbed Caddy.

‘Caddy, Caddy!’ returned Mrs Jellyby, opening another letter with the
greatest complacency. I have no doubt you did. How could you do
otherwise, being totally destitute of the sympathies with which he
overflows! Now, if my public duties were not a favourite child to me, if
I were not occupied with large measures on a vast scale, these petty
details might grieve me very much, Miss Summerson. But can I permit
the film of a silly proceeding on the part of Caddy (from whom I expect
nothing else) to interpose between me and the great African continent?
No. No,’ repeated Mrs Jellyby in a calm clear voice, and with an
agreeable smile, as she opened more letters and sorted them. ‘No,
indeed.’

I was so unprepared for the perfect coolness of this reception, though I
might have expected it, that I did not know what to say. Caddy
seemed equally at a loss. Mrs Jellyby continued to open and sort
letters and to repeat occasionally in quite a charming tone of voice
and with a smile of perfect composure, ‘No, indeed.’

T hope, Ma,’ sobbed poor Caddy at last, ‘you are not angry?’

‘Oh, Caddy, you really are an absurd girl,’ returned Mrs Jellyby, ‘to
ask such questions after what I have said of the preoccupation of my
mind.’

‘And I hope, Ma, you give us your consent and wish us well?’ said
Caddy.

‘You are a nonsensical child to have done anything of this kind,’ said
Mrs Jellyby; ‘and a degenerate child, when you might have devoted
yourself to the great public measure. But the step is taken, and I have
engaged a boy, and there is no more to be said. Now, pray, Caddy,’
said Mrs Jellyby, for Caddy was kissing her, ‘don't delay me in my
work, but let me clear off this heavy batch of papers before the
afternoon post comes in!’

I thought I could not do better than take my leave; I was detained for a
moment by Caddy's saying, ‘You won't object to my bringing him to

see you, Ma?’

‘Oh, dear me, Caddy,’ cried Mrs Jellyby, who had relapsed into that
distant contemplation, ‘have you begun again? Bring whom?’

‘Him, Ma.’
‘Caddy, Caddy!’ said Mrs Jellyby, quite weary of such little matters.
‘Then you must bring him some evening which is not a Parent Society
night, or a Branch night, or a Ramification night. You must
accommodate the visit to the demands upon my time. My dear Miss
Summerson, it was very kind of you to come here to help out this silly
chit. Good-bye! When I tell you that I have fifty- eight new letters from
manufacturing families anxious to understand the details of the native
and coffee-cultivation question this morning, I need not apologize for
having very little leisure.’

I was not surprised by Caddy's being in low spirits when we went
downstairs, or by her sobbing afresh on my neck, or by her saying she
would far rather have been scolded than treated with such
indifference, or by her confiding to me that she was so poor in clothes
that how she was ever to be married creditably she didn't know. I
gradually cheered her up by dwelling on the many things she would
do for her unfortunate father and for Peepy when she had a home of
her own; and finally we went downstairs into the damp dark kitchen,
where Peepy and his little brothers and sisters were grovelling on the
stone floor and where we had such a game of play with them that to
prevent myself from being quite torn to pieces I was obliged to fall
back on my fairy-tales. From time to time I heard loud voices in the
parlour overhead, and occasionally a violent tumbling about of the
furniture. The last effect I am afraid was caused by poor Mr Jellyby's
breaking away from the dining-table and making rushes at the
window with the intention of throwing himself into the area whenever
he made any new attempt to understand his affairs.

As I rode quietly home at night after the day's bustle, I thought a good
deal of Caddy's engagement and felt confirmed in my hopes (in spite of
the elder Mr Turveydrop) that she would be the happier and better for
it. And if there seemed to be but a slender chance of her and her
husband ever finding out what the model of deportment really was,
why that was all for the best too, and who would wish them to be
wiser? I did not wish them to be any wiser and indeed was half
ashamed of not entirely believing in him myself. And I looked up at
the stars, and thought about travellers in distant countries and the
stars THEY saw, and hoped I might always be so blest and happy as
to be useful to some one in my small way.

They were so glad to see me when I got home, as they always were,
that I could have sat down and cried for joy if that had not been a
method of making myself disagreeable. Everybody in the house, from
the lowest to the highest, showed me such a bright face of welcome,
and spoke so cheerily, and was so happy to do anything for me, that I
suppose there never was such a fortunate little creature in the world.
We got into such a chatty state that night, through Ada and my
guardian drawing me out to tell them all about Caddy, that I went on
prose, prose, prosing for a length of time. At last I got up to my own
room, quite red to think how I had been holding forth, and then I
heard a soft tap at my door. So I said, ‘Come in!’ and there came in a
pretty little girl, neatly dressed in mourning, who dropped a curtsy.

‘If you please, miss,’ said the little girl in a soft voice, ‘I am Charley.’

‘Why, so you are,’ said I, stooping down in astonishment and giving
her a kiss. ‘How glad am I to see you, Charley!’

Tf you please, miss,’ pursued Charley in the same soft voice, ‘I'm your
maid.’

‘Charley?’
‘If you please, miss, I'm a present to you, with Mr Jarndyce's love.’
I sat down with my hand on Charley's neck and looked at Charley.

‘And oh, miss,’ says Charley, clapping her hands, with the tears
starting down her dimpled cheeks, ‘Tom's at school, if you please, and
learning so good! And little Emma, she's with Mrs Blinder, miss, a-
being took such care of! And Tom, he would have been at school--and
Emma, she would have been left with Mrs Blinder--and me, I should
have been here--all a deal sooner, miss; only Mr Jarndyce thought
that Tom and Emma and me had better get a little used to parting
first, we was so small. Don't cry, if you please, miss!’

T can't help it, Charley.’

‘No, miss, nor I can't help it,’ says Charley. ‘And if you please, miss,
Mr Jarndyce's love, and he thinks you'll like to teach me now and
then. And if you please, Tom and Emma and me is to see each other
once a month. And I'm so happy and so thankful, miss,’ cried Charley
with a heaving heart, ‘and I'll try to be such a good maid!’

‘Oh, Charley dear, never forget who did all this!’

‘No, miss, I never will. Nor Tom won't. Nor yet Emma. It was all you,
miss.’

T have known nothing of it. It was Mr Jarndyce, Charley.’

‘Yes, miss, but it was all done for the love of you and that you might
be my mistress. If you please, miss, I am a little present with his love,
and it was all done for the love of you. Me and Tom was to be sure to
remember it.’

Charley dried her eyes and entered on her functions, going in her
matronly littl way about and about the room and folding up
everything she could lay her hands upon. Presently Charley came
creeping back to my side and said, ‘Oh, don't cry, if you please, miss.’

And I said again, I can't help it, Charley.’

And Charley said again, ‘No, miss, nor I can't help it.’ And so, after all,
I did cry for joy indeed, and so did she.
Chapter XXIV - An Appeal Case

As soon as Richard and I had held the conversation of which I have
given an account, Richard communicated the state of his mind to Mr
Jarndyce. I doubt if my guardian were altogether taken by surprise
when he received the representation, though it caused him much
uneasiness and disappointment. He and Richard were often closeted
together, late at night and early in the morning, and passed whole
days in London, and had innumerable appointments with Mr Kenge,
and laboured through a quantity of disagreeable business. While they
were thus employed, my guardian, though he underwent considerable
inconvenience from the state of the wind and rubbed his head so
constantly that not a single hair upon it ever rested in its right place,
was as genial with Ada and me as at any other time, but maintained a
steady reserve on these matters. And as our utmost endeavours could
only elicit from Richard himself sweeping assurances that everything
was going on capitally and that it really was all right at last, our
anxiety was not much relieved by him.

We learnt, however, as the time went on, that a new application was
made to the Lord Chancellor on Richard's behalf as an infant and a
ward, and I don't know what, and that there was a quantity of talking,
and that the Lord Chancellor described him in open court as a
vexatious and capricious infant, and that the matter was adjourned
and readjourned, and referred, and reported on, and petitioned about
until Richard began to doubt (as he told us) whether, if he entered the
army at all, it would not be as a veteran of seventy or eighty years of
age. At last an appointment was made for him to see the Lord
Chancellor again in his private room, and there the Lord Chancellor
very seriously reproved him for trifling with time and not knowing his
mind--’a pretty good joke, I think,’ said Richard, ‘from that quarter!’--
and at last it was settled that his application should be granted. His
name was entered at the Horse Guards as an applicant for an ensign's
commission; the purchase-money was deposited at an agent's; and
Richard, in his usual characteristic way, plunged into a violent course
of military study and got up at five o'clock every morning to practise
the broadsword exercise.

Thus, vacation succeeded term, and term succeeded vacation. We
sometimes heard of Jarndyce and Jarndyce as being in the paper or
out of the paper, or as being to be mentioned, or as being to be spoken
to; and it came on, and it went off. Richard, who was now in a
professor's house in London, was able to be with us less frequently
than before; my guardian still maintained the same reserve; and so
time passed until the commission was obtained and Richard received
directions with it to join a regiment in Ireland.
He arrived post-haste with the intelligence one evening, and had a
long conference with my guardian. Upwards of an hour elapsed before
my guardian put his head into the room where Ada and I were sitting
and said, ‘Come in, my dears!’ We went in and found Richard, whom
we had last seen in high spirits, leaning on the chimney-piece looking
mortified and angry.

‘Rick and I, Ada,’ said Mr Jarndyce, ‘are not quite of one mind. Come,
come, Rick, put a brighter face upon it!’

‘You are very hard with me, sir,’ said Richard. ‘The harder because
you have been so considerate to me in all other respects and have
done me kindnesses that I can never acknowledge. I never could have
been set right without you, sir.’

‘Well, well!’ said Mr Jarndyce. I want to set you more right yet. I want
to set you more right with yourself.’

T hope you will excuse my saying, sir,’ returned Richard in a fiery way,
but yet respectfully, ‘that I think I am the best judge about myself.’

T hope you will excuse my saying, my dear Rick,’ observed Mr
Jarndyce with the sweetest cheerfulness and good humour, ‘that it's
quite natural in you to think so, but I don't think so. I must do my
duty, Rick, or you could never care for me in cool blood; and I hope
you will always care for me, cool and hot.’

Ada had turned so pale that he made her sit down in his reading-
chair and sat beside her.

It's nothing, my dear,’ he said, ‘it's nothing. Rick and I have only had
a friendly difference, which we must state to you, for you are the
theme. Now you are afraid of what's coming.’

T am not indeed, cousin John,’ replied Ada with a smile, ‘if it is to
come from you.’

Thank you, my dear. Do you give me a minute's calm attention,
without looking at Rick. And, little woman, do you likewise. My dear
girl,’ putting his hand on hers as it lay on the side of the easy-chair,
‘you recollect the talk we had, we four when the little woman told me
of a little love affair?’

Tt is not likely that either Richard or I can ever forget your kindness
that day, cousin John.’

T can never forget it,’ said Richard.
‘And I can never forget it,’ said Ada.

‘So much the easier what I have to say, and so much the easier for us
to agree,’ returned my guardian, his face irradiated by the gentleness
and honour of his heart. ‘Ada, my bird, you should know that Rick
has now chosen his profession for the last time. All that he has of
certainty will be expended when he is fully equipped. He has
exhausted his resources and is bound henceforward to the tree he has
planted.’

‘Quite true that I have exhausted my present resources, and I am
quite content to know it. But what I have of certainty, sir,’ said
Richard, ‘is not all I have.’

‘Rick, Rick!’ cried my guardian with a sudden terror in his manner,
and in an altered voice, and putting up his hands as if he would have
stopped his ears. ‘For the love of God, don't found a hope or
expectation on the family curse! Whatever you do on this side the
grave, never give one lingering glance towards the horrible phantom
that has haunted us so many years. Better to borrow, better to beg,
better to die!’

We were all startled by the fervour of this warning. Richard bit his lip
and held his breath, and glanced at me as if he felt, and knew that I
felt too, how much he needed it.

‘Ada, my dear,’ said Mr Jarndyce, recovering his cheerfulness, ‘these
are strong words of advice, but I live in Bleak House and have seen a
sight here. Enough of that. All Richard had to start him in the race of
life is ventured. I recommend to him and you, for his sake and your
own, that he should depart from us with the understanding that there
is no sort of contract between you. I must go further. I will be plain
with you both. You were to confide freely in me, and I will confide
freely in you. I ask you wholly to relinquish, for the present, any tie
but your relationship.’

‘Better to say at once, sir,’ returned Richard, ‘that you renounce all
confidence in me and that you advise Ada to do the same.’

‘Better to say nothing of the sort, Rick, because I don't mean it.’
‘You think I have begun ill, sir,’ retorted Richard. ‘I HAVE, I know.’

‘How I hoped you would begin, and how go on, I told you when we
spoke of these things last,’ said Mr Jarndyce in a cordial and
encouraging manner. ‘You have not made that beginning yet, but
there is a time for all things, and yours is not gone by; rather, it is just
now fully come. Make a clear beginning altogether. You two (very
young, my dears) are cousins. As yet, you are nothing more. What
more may come must come of being worked out, Rick, and no sooner.’

‘You are very hard with me, sir,’ said Richard. ‘Harder than I could
have supposed you would be.’

‘My dear boy,’ said Mr Jarndyce, I am harder with myself when I do
anything that gives you pain. You have your remedy in your own
hands. Ada, it is better for him that he should be free and that there
should be no youthful engagement between you. Rick, it is better for
her, much better; you owe it to her. Come! Each of you will do what is
best for the other, if not what is best for yourselves.’

‘Why is it best, sir?’ returned Richard hastily. It was not when we
opened our hearts to you. You did not say so then.’

T have had experience since. I don't blame you, Rick, but I have had
experience since.’

‘You mean of me, sir.’

‘Well! Yes, of both of you,’ said Mr Jarndyce kindly. ‘The time is not
come for your standing pledged to one another. It is not right, and I
must not recognize it. Come, come, my young cousins, begin afresh!
Bygones shall be bygones, and a new page turned for you to write
your lives in.’

Richard gave an anxious glance at Ada but said nothing.

T have avoided saying one word to either of you or to Esther,’ said Mr
Jarndyce, ‘until now, in order that we might be open as the day, and
all on equal terms. I now affectionately advise, I now most earnestly
entreat, you two to part as you came here. Leave all else to time,
truth, and steadfastness. If you do otherwise, you will do wrong, and
you will have made me do wrong in ever bringing you together.’

A long silence succeeded.

‘Cousin Richard,’ said Ada then, raising her blue eyes tenderly to his
face, ‘after what our cousin John has said, I think no choice is left us.
Your mind may be quite at ease about me, for you will leave me here
under his care and will be sure that I can have nothing to wish for--
quite sure if I guide myself by his advice. I--I don't doubt, cousin
Richard,’ said Ada, a little confused, ‘that you are very fond of me, and
I--I don't think you will fall in love with anybody else. But I should like
you to consider well about it too, as I should like you to be in all
things very happy. You may trust in me, cousin Richard. I am not at
all changeable; but I am not unreasonable, and should never blame
you. Even cousins may be sorry to part; and in truth I am very, very
sorry, Richard, though I know it's for your welfare. I shall always
think of you affectionately, and often talk of you with Esther, and--
and perhaps you will sometimes think a little of me, cousin Richard.
So now,’ said Ada, going up to him and giving him her trembling
hand, ‘we are only cousins again, Richard--for the time perhaps-- and
I pray for a blessing on my dear cousin, wherever he goes!’

It was strange to me that Richard should not be able to forgive my
guardian for entertaining the very same opinion of him which he
himself had expressed of himself in much stronger terms to me. But it
was certainly the case. I observed with great regret that from this hour
he never was as free and open with Mr Jarndyce as he had been
before. He had every reason given him to be so, but he was not; and
solely on his side, an estrangement began to arise between them.

In the business of preparation and equipment he soon lost himself,
and even his grief at parting from Ada, who remained in Hertfordshire
while he, Mr Jarndyce, and I went up to London for a week. He
remembered her by fits and starts, even with bursts of tears, and at
such times would confide to me the heaviest self- reproaches. But ina
few minutes he would recklessly conjure up some undefinable means
by which they were both to be made rich and happy for ever, and
would become as gay as possible.

It was a busy time, and I trotted about with him all day long, buying a
variety of things of which he stood in need. Of the things he would
have bought if he had been left to his own ways I say nothing. He was
perfectly confidential with me, and often talked so sensibly and
feelingly about his faults and his vigorous resolutions, and dwelt so
much upon the encouragement he derived from these conversations
that I could never have been tired if I had tried.

There used, in that week, to come backward and forward to our
lodging to fence with Richard a person who had formerly been a
cavalry soldier; he was a fine bluff-looking man, of a frank free
bearing, with whom Richard had practised for some months. I heard
so much about him, not only from Richard, but from my guardian too,
that I was purposely in the room with my work one morning after
breakfast when he came.

‘Good morning, Mr George,’ said my guardian, who happened to be
alone with me. “Mr Carstone will be here directly. Meanwhile, Miss
Summerson is very happy to see you, I know. Sit down.’

He sat down, a little disconcerted by my presence, I thought, and
without looking at me, drew his heavy sunburnt hand across and
across his upper lip.
‘You are as punctual as the sun,’ said Mr Jarndyce.

‘Military time, sir,’ he replied. ‘Force of habit. A mere habit in me, sir. I
am not at all business-like.’

‘Yet you have a large establishment, too, I am told?’ said Mr Jarndyce.

‘Not much of a one, sir. I keep a shooting gallery, but not much ofa

?

one.

‘And what kind of a shot and what kind of a swordsman do you make
of Mr Carstone?’ said my guardian.

‘Pretty good, sir,’ he replied, folding his arms upon his broad chest
and looking very large. If Mr Carstone was to give his full mind to it,
he would come out very good.’

‘But he don't, I suppose?’ said my guardian.

‘He did at first, sir, but not afterwards. Not his full mind. Perhaps he
has something else upon it--some young lady, perhaps.’ His bright

dark eyes glanced at me for the first time.

‘He has not me upon his mind, I assure you, Mr George,’ said I,
laughing, ‘though you seem to suspect me.’

He reddened a little through his brown and made me a trooper's bow.
‘No offence, I hope, miss. I am one of the roughs.’

‘Not at all,’ said I. I take it as a compliment.’

If he had not looked at me before, he looked at me now in three or four
quick successive glances. I beg your pardon, sir,’ he said to my
guardian with a manly kind of diffidence, ‘but you did me the honour
to mention the young lady's name--’

‘Miss Summerson.’

‘Miss Summerson,’ he repeated, and looked at me again.

‘Do you know the name?’ I asked.

‘No, miss. To my knowledge I never heard it. I thought I had seen you
somewhere.’

T think not,’ I returned, raising my head from my work to look at him;
and there was something so genuine in his speech and manner that I
was glad of the opportunity. ‘I remember faces very well.’
‘So do I, miss!’ he returned, meeting my look with the fullness of his
dark eyes and broad forehead. ‘Humph! What set me off, now, upon
that!’

His once more reddening through his brown and being disconcerted
by his efforts to remember the association brought my guardian to his
relief.

‘Have you many pupils, Mr George?’

‘They vary in their number, sir. Mostly they're but a small lot to live
by.’

‘And what classes of chance people come to practise at your gallery?’

‘All sorts, sir. Natives and foreigners. From gentlemen to 'prentices. I
have had Frenchwomen come, before now, and show themselves dabs
at pistol-shooting. Mad people out of number, of course, but THEY go
everywhere where the doors stand open.’

‘People don't come with grudges and schemes of finishing their
practice with live targets, I hope?’ said my guardian, smiling.

‘Not much of that, sir, though that HAS happened. Mostly they come
for skill--or idleness. Six of one, and half-a-dozen of the other. I beg
your pardon,’ said Mr George, sitting stiffly upright and squaring an
elbow on each knee, ‘but I believe you're a Chancery suitor, if I have
heard correct?’

T am sorry to say I am.’
T have had one of YOUR compatriots in my time, sir.’
‘A Chancery suitor?’ returned my guardian. ‘How was that?’

‘Why, the man was so badgered and worried and tortured by being
knocked about from post to pillar, and from pillar to post,’ said Mr
George, ‘that he got out of sorts. I don't believe he had any idea of
taking aim at anybody, but he was in that condition of resentment
and violence that he would come and pay for fifty shots and fire away
till he was red hot. One day I said to him when there was nobody by
and he had been talking to me angrily about his wrongs, 'If this
practice is a safety-valve, comrade, well and good; but I don't
altogether like your being so bent upon it in your present state of
mind; I'd rather you took to something else.' I was on my guard for a
blow, he was that passionate; but he received it in very good part and
left off directly. We shook hands and struck up a sort of friendship.’
‘What was that man?’ asked my guardian in a new tone of interest.

‘Why, he began by being a small Shropshire farmer before they made a
baited bull of him,’ said Mr George.

‘Was his name Gridley?’
Tt was, sir.’

Mr George directed another succession of quick bright glances at me
as my guardian and I exchanged a word or two of surprise at the
coincidence, and I therefore explained to him how we knew the name.
He made me another of his soldierly bows in acknowledgment of what
he called my condescension.

T don't know,’ he said as he looked at me, ‘what it is that sets me off
again--but--bosh! What's my head running against!’ He passed one of
his heavy hands over his crisp dark hair as if to sweep the broken
thoughts out of his mind and sat a little forward, with one arm
akimbo and the other resting on his leg, looking in a brown study at
the ground.

T am sorry to learn that the same state of mind has got this Gridley
into new troubles and that he is in hiding,’ said my guardian.

‘So I am told, sir,’ returned Mr George, still musing and looking on the
ground. ‘So I am told.’

‘YYou don't know where?’

‘No, sir,’ returned the trooper, lifting up his eyes and coming out of his
reverie. ‘I can't say anything about him. He will be worn out soon, I
expect. You may file a strong man's heart away for a good many years,
but it will tell all of a sudden at last.’

Richard's entrance stopped the conversation. Mr George rose, made
me another of his soldierly bows, wished my guardian a good day, and
strode heavily out of the room.

This was the morning of the day appointed for Richard's departure.
We had no more purchases to make now; I had completed all his
packing early in the afternoon; and our time was disengaged until
night, when he was to go to Liverpool for Holyhead. Jarndyce and
Jarndyce being again expected to come on that day, Richard proposed
to me that we should go down to the court and hear what passed. As
it was his last day, and he was eager to go, and I had never been
there, I gave my consent and we walked down to Westminster, where
the court was then sitting. We beguiled the way with arrangements
concerning the letters that Richard was to write to me and the letters
that I was to write to him and with a great many hopeful projects. My
guardian knew where we were going and therefore was not with us.

When we came to the court, there was the Lord Chancellor--the same
whom I had seen in his private room in Lincoln's Inn--sitting in great
state and gravity on the bench, with the mace and seals on a red table
below him and an immense flat nosegay, like a little garden, which
scented the whole court. Below the table, again, was a long row of
solicitors, with bundles of papers on the matting at their feet; and
then there were the gentlemen of the bar in wigs and gowns--some
awake and some asleep, and one talking, and nobody paying much
attention to what he said. The Lord Chancellor leaned back in his very
easy chair with his elbow on the cushioned arm and his forehead
resting on his hand; some of those who were present dozed; some read
the newspapers; some walked about or whispered in groups: all
seemed perfectly at their ease, by no means in a hurry, very
unconcerned, and extremely comfortable.

To see everything going on so smoothly and to think of the roughness
of the suitors’ lives and deaths; to see all that full dress and ceremony
and to think of the waste, and want, and beggared misery it
represented; to consider that while the sickness of hope deferred was
raging in so many hearts this polite show went calmly on from day to
day, and year to year, in such good order and composure; to behold
the Lord Chancellor and the whole array of practitioners under him
looking at one another and at the spectators as if nobody had ever
heard that all over England the name in which they were assembled
was a bitter jest, was held in universal horror, contempt, and
indignation, was known for something so flagrant and bad that little
short of a miracle could bring any good out of it to any one--this was
so curious and self- contradictory to me, who had no experience of it,
that it was at first incredible, and I could not comprehend it. I sat
where Richard put me, and tried to listen, and looked about me; but
there seemed to be no reality in the whole scene except poor little Miss
Flite, the madwoman, standing on a bench and nodding at it.

Miss Flite soon espied us and came to where we sat. She gave me a
gracious welcome to her domain and indicated, with much
gratification and pride, its principal attractions. Mr Kenge also came
to speak to us and did the honours of the place in much the same
way, with the bland modesty of a proprietor. It was not a very good
day for a visit, he said; he would have preferred the first day of term;
but it was imposing, it was imposing.

When we had been there half an hour or so, the case in progress--if I
may use a phrase so ridiculous in such a connexion--seemed to die
out of its own vapidity, without coming, or being by anybody expected
to come, to any result. The Lord Chancellor then threw down a bundle
of papers from his desk to the gentlemen below him, and somebody
said, Jarndyce and Jarndyce.’ Upon this there was a buzz, and a
laugh, and a general withdrawal of the bystanders, and a bringing in
of great heaps, and piles, and bags and bags full of papers.

I think it came on ‘for further directions’--about some bill of costs, to
the best of my understanding, which was confused enough. But I
counted twenty-three gentlemen in wigs who said they were ‘in it,’ and
none of them appeared to understand it much better than I. They
chatted about it with the Lord Chancellor, and contradicted and
explained among themselves, and some of them said it was this way,
and some of them said it was that way, and some of them jocosely
proposed to read huge volumes of affidavits, and there was more
buzzing and laughing, and everybody concerned was in a state of idle
entertainment, and nothing could be made of it by anybody. After an
hour or so of this, and a good many speeches being begun and cut
short, it was ‘referred back for the present,’ as Mr Kenge said, and the
papers were bundled up again before the clerks had finished bringing
them in.

I glanced at Richard on the termination of these hopeless proceedings
and was shocked to see the worn look of his handsome young face. ‘It
can't last for ever, Dame Durden. Better luck next time!’ was all he
said.

I had seen Mr Guppy bringing in papers and arranging them for Mr
Kenge; and he had seen me and made me a forlorn bow, which
rendered me desirous to get out of the court. Richard had given me
his arm and was taking me away when Mr Guppy came up.

T beg your pardon, Mr Carstone,’ said he in a whisper, ‘and Miss
Summerson's also, but there's a lady here, a friend of mine, who
knows her and wishes to have the pleasure of shaking hands.’ As he
spoke, I saw before me, as if she had started into bodily shape from
my remembrance, Mrs Rachael of my godmother's house.

‘How do you do, Esther?’ said she. ‘Do you recollect me?’

I gave her my hand and told her yes and that she was very little
altered.

T wonder you remember those times, Esther,’ she returned with her
old asperity. ‘They are changed now. Well! I am glad to see you, and
glad you are not too proud to know me.’ But indeed she seemed
disappointed that I was not.

‘Proud, Mrs Rachael!’ I remonstrated.
T am married, Esther,’ she returned, coldly correcting me, ‘and am
Mrs Chadband. Well! I wish you good day, and I hope you'll do well.’

Mr Guppy, who had been attentive to this short dialogue, heaved a
sigh in my ear and elbowed his own and Mrs Rachael's way through
the confused little crowd of people coming in and going out, which we
were in the midst of and which the change in the business had
brought together. Richard and I were making our way through it, and
I was yet in the first chill of the late unexpected recognition when I
saw, coming towards us, but not seeing us, no less a person than Mr
George. He made nothing of the people about him as he tramped on,
staring over their heads into the body of the court.

‘George!’ said Richard as I called his attention to him.

‘You are well met, sir,’ he returned. ‘And you, miss. Could you point a
person out for me, I want? I don't understand these places.’

Turning as he spoke and making an easy way for us, he stopped when
we were out of the press in a corner behind a great red curtain.

‘There's a little cracked old woman,’ he began, ‘that--’

I put up my finger, for Miss Flite was close by me, having kept beside
me all the time and having called the attention of several of her legal
acquaintance to me (as I had overheard to my confusion) by
whispering in their ears, ‘Hush! Fitz Jarndyce on my left!’

‘Hem!’ said Mr George. ‘You remember, miss, that we passed some
conversation on a certain man this morning? Gridley,’ in a low
whisper behind his hand.

Yes,’ said I.

‘He is hiding at my place. I couldn't mention it. Hadn't his authority.
He is on his last march, miss, and has a whim to see her. He says
they can feel for one another, and she has been almost as good as a
friend to him here. I came down to look for her, for when I sat by
Gridley this afternoon, I seemed to hear the roll of the muffled drums.’

‘Shall I tell her?’ said I.

‘Would you be so good?’ he returned with a glance of something like
apprehension at Miss Flite. It's a providence I met you, miss; I doubt
if I should have known how to get on with that lady.’ And he put one
hand in his breast and stood upright in a martial attitude as I
informed little Miss Flite, in her ear, of the purport of his kind errand.
‘My angry friend from Shropshire! Almost as celebrated as myselfl’ she
exclaimed. ‘Now really! My dear, I will wait upon him with the greatest
pleasure.’

‘He is living concealed at Mr George's,’ said I. ‘Hush! This is Mr
George.’

‘In--deed!’ returned Miss Flite. ‘Very proud to have the honour! A
military man, my dear. You know, a perfect general!’ she whispered to
me.

Poor Miss Flite deemed it necessary to be so courtly and polite, as a
mark of her respect for the army, and to curtsy so very often that it
was no easy matter to get her out of the court. When this was at last
done, and addressing Mr George as ‘General,’ she gave him her arm,
to the great entertainment of some idlers who were looking on, he was
so discomposed and begged me so respectfully ‘not to desert him’ that
I could not make up my mind to do it, especially as Miss Flite was
always tractable with me and as she too said, ‘Fitz Jarndyce, my dear,
you will accompany us, of course.’ As Richard seemed quite willing,
and even anxious, that we should see them safely to their destination,
we agreed to do so. And as Mr George informed us that Gridley's mind
had run on Mr Jarndyce all the afternoon after hearing of their
interview in the morning, I wrote a hasty note in pencil to my
guardian to say where we were gone and why. Mr George sealed it at a
coffee-house, that it might lead to no discovery, and we sent it off by a
ticket- porter.

We then took a hackney-coach and drove away to the neighbourhood
of Leicester Square. We walked through some narrow courts, for
which Mr George apologized, and soon came to the shooting gallery,
the door of which was closed. As he pulled a bell-handle which hung
by a chain to the door-post, a very respectable old gentleman with
grey hair, wearing spectacles, and dressed in a black spencer and
gaiters and a broad-brimmed hat, and carrying a large gold-beaded
cane, addressed him.

T ask your pardon, my good friend,’ said he, ‘but is this George's
Shooting Gallery?’

Tt is, sir,’ returned Mr George, glancing up at the great letters in
which that inscription was painted on the whitewashed wall.

‘Oh! To be sure!’ said the old gentleman, following his eyes. ‘Thank
you. Have you rung the bell?’

‘My name is George, sir, and I have rung the bell.’
‘Oh, indeed?’ said the old gentleman. ‘Your name is George? Then I
am here as soon as you, you see. You came for me, no doubt?’

‘No, sir. You have the advantage of me.’

‘Oh, indeed?’ said the old gentleman. ‘Then it was your young man
who came for me. I am a physician and was requested--five minutes
ago--to come and visit a sick man at George's Shooting Gallery.’

‘The muffled drums,’ said Mr George, turning to Richard and me and
gravely shaking his head. ‘It's quite correct, sir. Will you please to
walk in.’

The door being at that moment opened by a very singular-looking little
man in a green-baize cap and apron, whose face and hands and dress
were blackened all over, we passed along a dreary passage into a large
building with bare brick walls where there were targets, and guns,
and swords, and other things of that kind. When we had all arrived
here, the physician stopped, and taking off his hat, appeared to
vanish by magic and to leave another and quite a different man in his
place.

‘Now lookee here, George,’ said the man, turning quickly round upon
him and tapping him on the breast with a large forefinger. ‘You know
me, and I know you. You're a man of the world, and I'm a man of the
world. My name's Bucket, as you are aware, and I have got a peace-
warrant against Gridley. You have kept him out of the way a long
time, and you have been artful in it, and it does you credit.’

Mr George, looking hard at him, bit his lip and shook his head.

‘Now, George,’ said the other, keeping close to him, ‘you're a sensible
man and a well-conducted man; that's what YOU are, beyond a doubt.
And mind you, I don't talk to you as a common character, because
you have served your country and you know that when duty calls we
must obey. Consequently you're very far from wanting to give trouble.
If I required assistance, you'd assist me; that's what YOU'D do. Phil
Squod, don't you go a-sidling round the gallery like that’--the dirty
little man was shuffling about with his shoulder against the wall, and
his eyes on the intruder, in a manner that looked threatening--
because I know you and won't have it.’

‘Phil!’ said Mr George.
‘Yes, guv'ner.’

‘Be quiet.’
The little man, with a low growl, stood still.

‘Ladies and gentlemen,’ said Mr Bucket, ‘you'll excuse anything that
may appear to be disagreeable in this, for my name's Inspector Bucket
of the Detective, and I have a duty to perform. George, I know where
my man is because I was on the roof last night and saw him through
the skylight, and you along with him. He is in there, you know,’
pointing; ‘that's where HE is--on a sofy. Now I must see my man, and I
must tell my man to consider himself in custody; but you know me,
and you know I don't want to take any uncomfortable measures. You
give me your word, as from one man to another (and an old soldier,
mind you, likewise), that it's honourable between us two, and I'll
accommodate you to the utmost of my power.’

‘T give it,’ was the reply. ‘But it wasn't handsome in you, Mr Bucket.’

‘Gammon, George! Not handsome?’ said Mr Bucket, tapping him on
his broad breast again and shaking hands with him. 1 don't say it
wasn't handsome in you to keep my man so close, do I? Be equally
good-tempered to me, old boy! Old William Tell, Old Shaw, the Life
Guardsman! Why, he's a model of the whole British army in himself,
ladies and gentlemen. I'd give a fifty-pun' note to be such a figure of a
man!’

The affair being brought to this head, Mr George, after a little
consideration, proposed to go in first to his comrade (as he called
him), taking Miss Flite with him. Mr Bucket agreeing, they went away
to the further end of the gallery, leaving us sitting and standing by a
table covered with guns. Mr Bucket took this opportunity of entering
into a little light conversation, asking me if I were afraid of fire-arms,
as most young ladies were; asking Richard if he were a good shot;
asking Phil Squod which he considered the best of those rifles and
what it might be worth first-hand, telling him in return that it was a
pity he ever gave way to his temper, for he was naturally so amiable
that he might have been a young woman, and making himself
generally agreeable.

After a time he followed us to the further end of the gallery, and
Richard and I were going quietly away when Mr George came after us.
He said that if we had no objection to see his comrade, he would take
a visit from us very kindly. The words had hardly passed his lips when
the bell was rung and my guardian appeared, ‘on the chance,’ he
slightly observed, ‘of being able to do any little thing for a poor fellow
involved in the same misfortune as himself.’ We all four went back
together and went into the place where Gridley was.

It was a bare room, partitioned off from the gallery with unpainted
wood. As the screening was not more than eight or ten feet high and
only enclosed the sides, not the top, the rafters of the high gallery roof
were overhead, and the skylight through which Mr Bucket had looked
down. The sun was low--near setting--and its light came redly in
above, without descending to the ground. Upon a plain canvas-
covered sofa lay the man from Shropshire, dressed much as we had
seen him last, but so changed that at first I recognized no likeness in
his colourless face to what I recollected.

He had been still writing in his hiding-place, and still dwelling on his
grievances, hour after hour. A table and some shelves were covered
with manuscript papers and with worn pens and a medley of such
tokens. Touchingly and awfully drawn together, he and the little mad
woman were side by side and, as it were, alone. She sat on a chair
holding his hand, and none of us went close to them.

His voice had faded, with the old expression of his face, with his
strength, with his anger, with his resistance to the wrongs that had at
last subdued him. The faintest shadow of an object full of form and
colour is such a picture of it as he was of the man from Shropshire
whom we had spoken with before.

He inclined his head to Richard and me and spoke to my guardian.

‘Mr Jarndyce, it is very kind of you to come to see me. I am not long to
be seen, I think. I am very glad to take your hand, sir. You are a good
man, superior to injustice, and God knows I honour you.’

They shook hands earnestly, and my guardian said some words of
comfort to him.

It may seem strange to you, sir,’ returned Gridley; I should not have
liked to see you if this had been the first time of our meeting. But you
know I made a fight for it, you know I stood up with my single hand
against them all, you know I told them the truth to the last, and told
them what they were, and what they had done to me; so I don't mind
your seeing me, this wreck.’

‘YYou have been courageous with them many and many a time,’
returned my guardian.

‘Sir, I have been,’ with a faint smile. T told you what would come of it
when I ceased to be so, and see here! Look at us--look at us!’ He drew
the hand Miss Flite held through her arm and brought her something
nearer to him.

‘This ends it. Of all my old associations, of all my old pursuits and
hopes, of all the living and the dead world, this one poor soul alone
comes natural to me, and I am fit for. There is a tie of many suffering
years between us two, and it is the only tie I ever had on earth that
Chancery has not broken.’

‘Accept my blessing, Gridley,’ said Miss Flite in tears. ‘Accept my
blessing!’

T thought, boastfully, that they never could break my heart, Mr
Jarndyce. I was resolved that they should not. I did believe that I
could, and would, charge them with being the mockery they were until
I died of some bodily disorder. But I am worn out. How long I have
been wearing out, I don't know; I seemed to break down in an hour. I
hope they may never come to hear of it. I hope everybody here will
lead them to believe that I died defying them, consistently and
perseveringly, as I did through so many years.’

Here Mr Bucket, who was sitting in a corner by the door, good-
naturedly offered such consolation as he could administer.

‘Come, come!’ he said from his corner. ‘Don't go on in that way, Mr
Gridley. You are only a little low. We are all of us a little low
sometimes. I am. Hold up, hold up! You'll lose your temper with the
whole round of 'em, again and again; and I shall take you on a score
of warrants yet, if I have luck.’

He only shook his head.

‘Don't shake your head,’ said Mr Bucket. ‘Nod it; that's what I want to
see you do. Why, Lord bless your soul, what times we have had
together! Haven't I seen you in the Fleet over and over again for
contempt? Haven't I come into court, twenty afternoons for no other
purpose than to see you pin the Chancellor like a bull-dog? Don't you
remember when you first began to threaten the lawyers, and the peace
was sworn against you two or three times a week? Ask the little old
lady there; she has been always present. Hold up, Mr Gridley, hold
up, sir!’

‘What are you going to do about him?’ asked George in a low voice.

T don't know yet,’ said Bucket in the same tone. Then resuming his
encouragement, he pursued aloud: ‘Worn out, Mr Gridley? After
dodging me for all these weeks and forcing me to climb the roof here
like a tom cat and to come to see you as a doctor? That ain't like being
worn out. I should think not! Now I tell you what you want. You want
excitement, you know, to keep YOU up; that's what YOU want. You're
used to it, and you can't do without it. I couldn't myself. Very well,
then; here's this warrant got by Mr Tulkinghorn of Lincoln's Inn
Fields, and backed into half-a-dozen counties since. What do you say
to coming along with me, upon this warrant, and having a good angry
argument before the magistrates? It'll do you good; it'll freshen you up
and get you into training for another turn at the Chancellor. Give in?
Why, I am surprised to hear a man of your energy talk of giving in.
You mustn't do that. You're half the fun of the fair in the Court of
Chancery. George, you lend Mr Gridley a hand, and let's see now
whether he won't be better up than down.’

‘He is very weak,’ said the trooper in a low voice.

Is he?’ returned Bucket anxiously. IT only want to rouse him. I don't
like to see an old acquaintance giving in like this. It would cheer him
up more than anything if I could make him a little waxy with me. He's
welcome to drop into me, right and left, if he likes. I shall never take
advantage of it.’

The roof rang with a scream from Miss Flite, which still rings in my
ears.

‘Oh, no, Gridley!’ she cried as he fell heavily and calmly back from
before her. ‘Not without my blessing. After so many years!’

The sun was down, the light had gradually stolen from the roof, and
the shadow had crept upward. But to me the shadow of that pair, one
living and one dead, fell heavier on Richard's departure than the
darkness of the darkest night. And through Richard's farewell words I
heard it echoed: ‘Of all my old associations, of all my old pursuits and
hopes, of all the living and the dead world, this one poor soul alone
comes natural to me, and I am fit for. There is a tie of many suffering
years between us two, and it is the only tie I ever had on earth that
Chancery has not broken!’
Chapter XXV - Mrs Snagsby Sees It All

There is disquietude in Cook's Court, Cursitor Street. Black suspicion
hides in that peaceful region. The mass of Cook's Courtiers are in
their usual state of mind, no better and no worse; but Mr Snagsby is
changed, and his little woman knows it.

For Tom-all-Alone's and Lincoln's Inn Fields persist in harnessing
themselves, a pair of ungovernable coursers, to the chariot of Mr
Snagsby's imagination; and Mr Bucket drives; and the passengers are
Jo and Mr Tulkinghorn; and the complete equipage whirls though the
law-stationery business at wild speed all round the clock. Even in the
little front kitchen where the family meals are taken, it rattles away at
a smoking pace from the dinner-table, when Mr Snagsby pauses in
carving the first slice of the leg of mutton baked with potatoes and
stares at the kitchen wall.

Mr Snagsby cannot make out what it is that he has had to do with.
Something is wrong somewhere, but what something, what may come
of it, to whom, when, and from which unthought of and unheard of
quarter is the puzzle of his life. His remote impressions of the robes
and coronets, the stars and garters, that sparkle through the surface-
dust of Mr Tulkinghorn's chambers; his veneration for the mysteries
presided over by that best and closest of his customers, whom all the
Inns of Court, all Chancery Lane, and all the legal neighbourhood
agree to hold in awe; his remembrance of Detective Mr Bucket with
his forefinger and his confidential manner, impossible to be evaded or
declined, persuade him that he is a party to some dangerous secret
without knowing what it is. And it is the fearful peculiarity of this
condition that, at any hour of his daily life, at any opening of the
shop-door, at any pull of the bell, at any entrance of a messenger, or
any delivery of a letter, the secret may take air and fire, explode, and
blow up--Mr Bucket only knows whom.

For which reason, whenever a man unknown comes into the shop (as
many men unknown do) and says, Is Mr Snagsby in?’ or words to that
innocent effect, Mr Snagsby's heart knocks hard at his guilty breast.
He undergoes so much from such inquiries that when they are made
by boys he revenges himself by flipping at their ears over the counter
and asking the young dogs what they mean by it and why they can't
speak out at once? More impracticable men and boys persist in
walking into Mr Snagsby's sleep and terrifying him with
unaccountable questions, so that often when the cock at the little
dairy in Cursitor Street breaks out in his usual absurd way about the
morning, Mr Snagsby finds himself in a crisis of nightmare, with his
little woman shaking him and saying ‘What's the matter with the
man!’
The little woman herself is not the least item in his difficulty. To know
that he is always keeping a secret from her, that he has under all
circumstances to conceal and hold fast a tender double tooth, which
her sharpness is ever ready to twist out of his head, gives Mr Snagsby,
in her dentistical presence, much of the air of a dog who has a
reservation from his master and will look anywhere rather than meet
his eye.

These various signs and tokens, marked by the little woman, are not
lost upon her. They impel her to say, ‘Snagsby has something on his
mind!’ And thus suspicion gets into Cook's Court, Cursitor Street.
From suspicion to jealousy, Mrs Snagsby finds the road as natural
and short as from Cook's Court to Chancery Lane. And thus jealousy
gets into Cook's Court, Cursitor Street. Once there (and it was always
lurking thereabout), it is very active and nimble in Mrs Snagsby's
breast, prompting her to nocturnal examinations of Mr Snagsby's
pockets; to secret perusals of Mr Snagsby's letters; to private
researches in the day book and ledger, till, cash-box, and iron safe; to
watchings at windows, listenings behind doors, and a general putting
of this and that together by the wrong end.

Mrs Snagsby is so perpetually on the alert that the house becomes
ghostly with creaking boards and rustling garments. The 'prentices
think somebody may have been murdered there in bygone times.
Guster holds certain loose atoms of an idea (picked up at Tooting,
where they were found floating among the orphans) that there is
buried money underneath the cellar, guarded by an old man with a
white beard, who cannot get out for seven thousand years because he
said the Lord's Prayer backwards.

‘Who was Nimrod?’ Mrs Snagsby repeatedly inquires of herself. ‘Who
was that lady--that creature? And who is that boy?’ Now, Nimrod
being as dead as the mighty hunter whose name Mrs Snagsby has
appropriated, and the lady being unproducible, she directs her mental
eye, for the present, with redoubled vigilance to the boy. ‘And who,’
quoth Mrs Snagsby for the thousand and first time, ‘is that boy? Who
is that--!’ And there Mrs Snagsby is seized with an inspiration.

He has no respect for Mr Chadband. No, to be sure, and he wouldn't
have, of course. Naturally he wouldn't, under those contagious
circumstances. He was invited and appointed by Mr Chadband--why,
Mrs Snagsby heard it herself with her own ears!--to come back, and
be told where he was to go, to be addressed by Mr Chadband; and he
never came! Why did he never come? Because he was told not to
come. Who told him not to come? Who? Ha, ha! Mrs Snagsby sees it
all.
But happily (and Mrs Snagsby tightly shakes her head and tightly
smiles) that boy was met by Mr Chadband yesterday in the streets;
and that boy, as affording a subject which Mr Chadband desires to
improve for the spiritual delight of a select congregation, was seized by
Mr Chadband and threatened with being delivered over to the police
unless he showed the reverend gentleman where he lived and unless
he entered into, and fulfilled, an undertaking to appear in Cook's
Court to-morrow night, ‘to--mor--row--night,’ Mrs Snagsby repeats for
mere emphasis with another tight smile and another tight shake of
her head; and to-morrow night that boy will be here, and to-morrow
night Mrs Snagsby will have her eye upon him and upon some one
else; and oh, you may walk a long while in your secret ways (says Mrs
Snagsby with haughtiness and scorn), but you can't blind ME!

Mrs Snagsby sounds no timbrel in anybody's ears, but holds her
purpose quietly, and keeps her counsel. To-morrow comes, the
savoury preparations for the Oil Trade come, the evening comes.
Comes Mr Snagsby in his black coat; come the Chadbands; come
(when the gorging vessel is replete) the 'prentices and Guster, to be
edified; comes at last, with his slouching head, and his shuffle
backward, and his shuffle forward, and his shuffle to the right, and
his shuffle to the left, and his bit of fur cap in his muddy hand, which
he picks as if it were some mangy bird he had caught and was
plucking before eating raw, Jo, the very, very tough subject Mr
Chadband is to improve.

Mrs Snagsby screws a watchful glance on Jo as he is brought into the
little drawing-room by Guster. He looks at Mr Snagsby the moment he
comes in. Aha! Why does he look at Mr Snagsby? Mr Snagsby looks at
him. Why should he do that, but that Mrs Snagsby sees it allP Why
else should that look pass between them, why else should Mr Snagsby
be confused and cough a signal cough behind his hand? It is as clear
as crystal that Mr Snagsby is that boy's father.

‘Peace, my friends,’ says Chadband, rising and wiping the oily
exudations from his reverend visage. ‘Peace be with us! My friends,
why with us? Because,’ with his fat smile, ‘it cannot be against us,
because it must be for us; because it is not hardening, because it is
softening; because it does not make war like the hawk, but comes
home unto us like the dove. Therefore, my friends, peace be with us!
My human boy, come forward!’

Stretching forth his flabby paw, Mr Chadband lays the same on Jo's
arm and considers where to station him. Jo, very doubtful of his
reverend friend's intentions and not at all clear but that something
practical and painful is going to be done to him, mutters, ‘You let me
alone. I never said nothink to you. You let me alone.’
‘No, my young friend,’ says Chadband smoothly, 1 will not let you
alone. And why? Because I am a harvest-labourer, because I am a
toiler and a moiler, because you are delivered over unto me and are
become as a precious instrument in my hands. My friends, may I so
employ this instrument as to use it to your advantage, to your profit,
to your gain, to your welfare, to your enrichment! My young friend, sit
upon this stool.’

Jo, apparently possessed by an impression that the reverend
gentleman wants to cut his hair, shields his head with both arms and
is got into the required position with great difficulty and every possible
manifestation of reluctance.

When he is at last adjusted like a lay-figure, Mr Chadband, retiring
behind the table, holds up his bear's-paw and says, “My friends!’ This
is the signal for a general settlement of the audience. The 'prentices
giggle internally and nudge each other. Guster falls into a staring and
vacant state, compounded of a stunned admiration of Mr Chadband
and pity for the friendless outcast whose condition touches her nearly.
Mrs Snagsby silently lays trains of gunpowder. Mrs Chadband
composes herself grimly by the fire and warms her knees, finding that
sensation favourable to the reception of eloquence.

It happens that Mr Chadband has a pulpit habit of fixing some
member of his congregation with his eye and fatly arguing his points
with that particular person, who is understood to be expected to be
moved to an occasional grunt, groan, gasp, or other audible
expression of inward working, which expression of inward working,
being echoed by some elderly lady in the next pew and so
communicated like a game of forfeits through a circle of the more
fermentable sinners present, serves the purpose of parliamentary
cheering and gets Mr Chadband's steam up. From mere force of habit,
Mr Chadband in saying “My friends!’ has rested his eye on Mr Snagsby
and proceeds to make that ill-starred stationer, already sufficiently
confused, the immediate recipient of his discourse.

‘We have here among us, my friends,’ says Chadband, ‘a Gentile anda
heathen, a dweller in the tents of Tom-all-Alone's and a mover-on
upon the surface of the earth. We have here among us, my friends,’
and Mr Chadband, untwisting the point with his dirty thumb-nail,
bestows an oily smile on Mr Snagsby, signifying that he will throw him
an argumentative back-fall presently if he be not already down, ‘a
brother and a boy. Devoid of parents, devoid of relations, devoid of
flocks and herds, devoid of gold and silver and of precious stones.
Now, my friends, why do I say he is devoid of these possessions? Why?
Why is he?’ Mr Chadband states the question as if he were
propounding an entirely new riddle of much ingenuity and merit to Mr
Snagsby and entreating him not to give it up.
Mr Snagsby, greatly perplexed by the mysterious look he received just
now from his little woman--at about the period when Mr Chadband
mentioned the word parents--is tempted into modestly remarking, 1
don't know, I'm sure, sir.” On which interruption Mrs Chadband glares
and Mrs Snagsby says, ‘For shame!’

T hear a voice,’ says Chadband; ‘is it a still small voice, my friends? I
fear not, though I fain would hope so--’

‘Ah--h!’ from Mrs Snagsby.

‘Which says, 'I don't know.' Then I will tell you why. I say this brother
present here among us is devoid of parents, devoid of relations, devoid
of flocks and herds, devoid of gold, of silver, and of precious stones
because he is devoid of the light that shines in upon some of us. What
is that light? What is it? I ask you, what is that light?’

Mr Chadband draws back his head and pauses, but Mr Snagsby is
not to be lured on to his destruction again. Mr Chadband, leaning
forward over the table, pierces what he has got to follow directly into
Mr Snagsby with the thumb-nail already mentioned.

Tt is,’ says Chadband, ‘the ray of rays, the sun of suns, the moon of
moons, the star of stars. It is the light of Terewth.’

Mr Chadband draws himself up again and looks triumphantly at Mr
Snagsby as if he would be glad to know how he feels after that.

‘Of Terewth,’ says Mr Chadband, hitting him again. ‘Say not to me
that it is NOT the lamp of lamps. I say to you it is. I say to you, a
million of times over, it is. It is! I say to you that I will proclaim it to
you, whether you like it or not; nay, that the less you like it, the more
I will proclaim it to you. With a speaking-trumpet! I say to you that if
you rear yourself against it, you shall fall, you shall be bruised, you
shall be battered, you shall be flawed, you shall be smashed.’

The present effect of this flight of oratory--much admired for its
general power by Mr Chadband's followers--being not only to make Mr
Chadband unpleasantly warm, but to represent the innocent Mr
Snagsby in the light of a determined enemy to virtue, with a forehead
of brass and a heart of adamant, that unfortunate tradesman
becomes yet more disconcerted and is in a very advanced state of low
spirits and false position when Mr Chadband accidentally finishes
him.

‘My friends,’ he resumes after dabbing his fat head for some time--
and it smokes to such an extent that he seems to light his pocket-
handkerchief at it, which smokes, too, after every dab--’to pursue the
subject we are endeavouring with our lowly gifts to improve, let us ina
spirit of love inquire what is that Terewth to which I have alluded. For,
my young friends,’ suddenly addressing the 'prentices and Guster, to
their consternation, ‘if 1 am told by the doctor that calomel or castor-
oil is good for me, I may naturally ask what is calomel, and what is
castor-oil. I may wish to be informed of that before I dose myself with
either or with both. Now, my young friends, what is this Terewth
then? Firstly (in a spirit of love), what is the common sort of Terewth--
the working clothes--the every-day wear, my young friends? Is it
deception?’

‘Ah--h!’ from Mrs Snagsby.

Ts it suppression?’

A shiver in the negative from Mrs Snagsby.

‘Is it reservation?’

A shake of the head from Mrs Snagsby--very long and very tight.

‘No, my friends, it is neither of these. Neither of these names belongs
to it. When this young heathen now among us--who is now, my
friends, asleep, the seal of indifference and perdition being set upon
his eyelids; but do not wake him, for it is right that I should have to
wrestle, and to combat and to struggle, and to conquer, for his sake--
when this young hardened heathen told us a story of a cock, and of a
bull, and of a lady, and of a sovereign, was THAT the Terewth? No. Or
if it was partly, was it wholly and entirely? No, my friends, no!’

If Mr Snagsby could withstand his little woman's look as it enters at
his eyes, the windows of his soul, and searches the whole tenement,
he were other than the man he is. He cowers and droops.

‘Or, my juvenile friends,’ says Chadband, descending to the level of
their comprehension with a very obtrusive demonstration in his
greasily meek smile of coming a long way downstairs for the purpose,
if the master of this house was to go forth into the city and there see
an eel, and was to come back, and was to call unto him the mistress
of this house, and was to say, 'Sarah, rejoice with me, for I have seen
an elephant!’ would THAT be Terewth?’

Mrs Snagsby in tears.
‘Or put it, my juvenile friends, that he saw an elephant, and returning

said 'Lo, the city is barren, I have seen but an eel,’ would THAT be
Terewth?’
Mrs Snagsby sobbing loudly.

‘Or put it, my juvenile friends,’ said Chadband, stimulated by the
sound, ‘that the unnatural parents of this slumbering heathen--for
parents he had, my juvenile friends, beyond a doubt--after casting
him forth to the wolves and the vultures, and the wild dogs and the
young gazelles, and the serpents, went back to their dwellings and
had their pipes, and their pots, and their flutings and their dancings,
and their malt liquors, and their butcher's meat and poultry, would
THAT be Terewth?’

Mrs Snagsby replies by delivering herself a prey to spasms, not an
unresisting prey, but a crying and a tearing one, so that Cook's Court
re-echoes with her shrieks. Finally, becoming cataleptic, she has to be
carried up the narrow staircase like a grand piano. After unspeakable
suffering, productive of the utmost consternation, she is pronounced,
by expresses from the bedroom, free from pain, though much
exhausted, in which state of affairs Mr Snagsby, trampled and
crushed in the piano-forte removal, and extremely timid and feeble,
ventures to come out from behind the door in the drawing-room.

All this time Jo has been standing on the spot where he woke up, ever
picking his cap and putting bits of fur in his mouth. He spits them out
with a remorseful air, for he feels that it is in his nature to be an
unimprovable reprobate and that it's no good HIS trying to keep
awake, for HE won't never know nothink. Though it may be, Jo, that
there is a history so interesting and affecting even to minds as near
the brutes as thine, recording deeds done on this earth for common
men, that if the Chadbands, removing their own persons from the
light, would but show it thee in simple reverence, would but leave it
unimproved, would but regard it as being eloquent enough without
their modest aid--it might hold thee awake, and thou might learn from
it yet!

Jo never heard of any such book. Its compilers and the Reverend
Chadband are all one to him, except that he knows the Reverend
Chadband and would rather run away from him for an hour than hear
him talk for five minutes. Tt an't no good my waiting here no longer,’
thinks Jo. ‘Mr Snagsby an't a-going to say nothink to me to-night.’
And downstairs he shuffles.

But downstairs is the charitable Guster, holding by the handrail of the
kitchen stairs and warding off a fit, as yet doubtfully, the same having
been induced by Mrs Snagsby's screaming. She has her own supper of
bread and cheese to hand to Jo, with whom she ventures to
interchange a word or so for the first time.

‘Here's something to eat, poor boy,’ says Guster.
‘Thank'ee, mum,’ says Jo.

‘Are you hungry?’

Jist!’ says Jo.

‘What's gone of your father and your mother, eh?’

Jo stops in the middle of a bite and looks petrified. For this orphan
charge of the Christian saint whose shrine was at Tooting has patted
him on the shoulder, and it is the first time in his life that any decent
hand has been so laid upon him.

T never know'd nothink about 'em,’ says Jo.

‘No more didn't I of mine,’ cries Guster. She is repressing symptoms
favourable to the fit when she seems to take alarm at something and
vanishes down the stairs.

‘Jo,’ whispers the law-stationer softly as the boy lingers on the step.
‘Here Iam, Mr Snagsby!’

T didn't know you were gone--there's another half-crown, Jo. It was
quite right of you to say nothing about the lady the other night when
we were out together. It would breed trouble. You can't be too quiet,
Jo.’

T am fly, master!’
And so, good night.

A ghostly shade, frilled and night-capped, follows the law- stationer to
the room he came from and glides higher up. And henceforth he
begins, go where he will, to be attended by another shadow than his
own, hardly less constant than his own, hardly less quiet than his
own. And into whatsoever atmosphere of secrecy his own shadow may
pass, let all concerned in the secrecy beware! For the watchful Mrs
Snagsby is there too--bone of his bone, flesh of his flesh, shadow of
his shadow.
Chapter XXVI - Sharpshooters

Wintry morning, looking with dull eyes and sallow face upon the
neighbourhood of Leicester Square, finds its inhabitants unwilling to
get out of bed. Many of them are not early risers at the brightest of
times, being birds of night who roost when the sun is high and are
wide awake and keen for prey when the stars shine out. Behind dingy
blind and curtain, in upper story and garret, skulking more or less
under false names, false hair, false titles, false jewellery, and false
histories, a colony of brigands lie in their first sleep. Gentlemen of the
green-baize road who could discourse from personal experience of
foreign galleys and home treadmills; spies of strong governments that
eternally quake with weakness and miserable fear, broken traitors,
cowards, bullies, gamesters, shufflers, swindlers, and false witnesses;
some not unmarked by the branding-iron beneath their dirty braid; all
with more cruelty in them than was in Nero, and more crime than is
in Newgate. For howsoever bad the devil can be in fustian or smock-
frock (and he can be very bad in both), he is a more designing,
callous, and intolerable devil when he sticks a pin in his shirt-front,
calls himself a gentleman, backs a card or colour, plays a game or so
of billiards, and knows a little about bills and promissory notes than
in any other form he wears. And in such form Mr Bucket shall find
him, when he will, still pervading the tributary channels of Leicester
Square.

But the wintry morning wants him not and wakes him not. It wakes
Mr George of the shooting gallery and his familiar. They arise, roll up
and stow away their mattresses. Mr George, having shaved himself
before a looking-glass of minute proportions, then marches out, bare-
headed and bare-chested, to the pump in the little yard and anon
comes back shining with yellow soap, friction, drifting rain, and
exceedingly cold water. As he rubs himself upon a large jack-towel,
blowing like a military sort of diver just come up, his hair curling
tighter and tighter on his sunburnt temples the more he rubs it so
that it looks as if it never could be loosened by any less coercive
instrument than an iron rake or a curry-comb--as he rubs, and puffs,
and polishes, and blows, turning his head from side to side the more
conveniently to excoriate his throat, and standing with his body well
bent forward to keep the wet from his martial legs, Phil, on his knees
lighting a fire, looks round as if it were enough washing for him to see
all that done, and sufficient renovation for one day to take in the
superfluous health his master throws off.

When Mr George is dry, he goes to work to brush his head with two
hard brushes at once, to that unmerciful degree that Phil, shouldering
his way round the gallery in the act of sweeping it, winks with
sympathy. This chafing over, the ornamental part of Mr George's toilet
is soon performed. He fills his pipe, lights it, and marches up and
down smoking, as his custom is, while Phil, raising a powerful odour
of hot rolls and coffee, prepares breakfast. He smokes gravely and
marches in slow time. Perhaps this morning's pipe is devoted to the
memory of Gridley in his grave.

‘And so, Phil,’ says George of the shooting gallery after several turns in
silence, ‘you were dreaming of the country last night?’

Phil, by the by, said as much in a tone of surprise as he scrambled
out of bed.

‘Yes, guv'ner.’

‘What was it like?’

T hardly know what it was like, guv'ner,’ said Phil, considering.
‘How did you know it was the country?’

‘On account of the grass, I think. And the swans upon it,’ says Phil
after further consideration.

‘What were the swans doing on the grass?’
‘They was a-eating of it, I expect,’ says Phil.

The master resumes his march, and the man resumes his preparation
of breakfast. It is not necessarily a lengthened preparation, being
limited to the setting forth of very simple breakfast requisites for two
and the broiling of a rasher of bacon at the fire in the rusty grate; but
as Phil has to sidle round a considerable part of the gallery for every
object he wants, and never brings two objects at once, it takes time
under the circumstances. At length the breakfast is ready. Phil
announcing it, Mr George knocks the ashes out of his pipe on the hob,
stands his pipe itself in the chimney corner, and sits down to the
meal. When he has helped himself, Phil follows suit, sitting at the
extreme end of the little oblong table and taking his plate on his
knees. Either in humility, or to hide his blackened hands, or because
it is his natural manner of eating.

The country,’ says Mr George, plying his knife and fork; ‘why, I
suppose you never clapped your eyes on the country, Phil?’

‘IT see the marshes once,’ says Phil, contentedly eating his breakfast.
‘What marshes?’

‘THE marshes, commander,’ returns Phil.
‘Where are they?’

T don't know where they are,’ says Phil; ‘but I see 'em, guv'ner. They
was flat. And miste.’

Governor and commander are interchangeable terms with Phil,
expressive of the same respect and deference and applicable to nobody
but Mr George.

T was born in the country, Phil.’

‘Was you indeed, commander?’

‘Yes. And bred there.’

Phil elevates his one eyebrow, and after respectfully staring at his
master to express interest, swallows a great gulp of coffee, still staring
at him.

There's not a bird's note that I don't know,’ says Mr George. ‘Not
many an English leaf or berry that I couldn't name. Not many a tree
that I couldn't climb yet if I was put to it. I was a real country boy,
once. My good mother lived in the country.’

‘She must have been a fine old lady, guv'ner,’ Phil observes.

‘Aye! And not so old either, five and thirty years ago,’ says Mr George.
‘But I'll wager that at ninety she would be near as upright as me, and
near as broad across the shoulders.’

‘Did she die at ninety, guv'ner?’ inquires Phil.

‘No. Bosh! Let her rest in peace, God bless her!’ says the trooper.
‘What set me on about country boys, and runaways, and good-for-
nothings? You, to be sure! So you never clapped your eyes upon the
country--marshes and dreams excepted. Eh?’

Phil shakes his head.

‘Do you want to see it?’

‘N-no, I don't know as I do, particular,’ says Phil.

‘The town's enough for you, eh?’

‘Why, you see, commander,’ says Phil, I ain't acquainted with

anythink else, and I doubt if I ain't a-getting too old to take to
novelties.’
‘How old ARE you, Phil?’ asks the trooper, pausing as he conveys his
smoking saucer to his lips.

Tm something with a eight in it,’ says Phil. It can't be eighty. Nor yet
eighteen. It's betwixt 'em, somewheres.’

Mr George, slowly putting down his saucer without tasting its
contents, is laughingly beginning, ‘Why, what the deuce, Phil--’ when
he stops, seeing that Phil is counting on his dirty fingers.

T was just eight,’ says Phil, ‘agreeable to the parish calculation, when I
went with the tinker. I was sent on a errand, and I see him a-sittin
under a old buildin with a fire all to himself wery comfortable, and he
says, 'Would you like to come along a me, my man?’ I says 'Yes,' and
him and me and the fire goes home to Clerkenwell together. That was
April Fool Day. I was able to count up to ten; and when April Fool Day
come round again, I says to myself, 'Now, old chap, you're one and a
eight in it.' April Fool Day after that, I says, 'Now, old chap, you're two
and a eight in it.' In course of time, I come to ten and a eight in it; two
tens and a eight in it. When it got so high, it got the upper hand of
me, but this is how I always know there's a eight in it.’

‘Ah!’ says Mr George, resuming his breakfast. ‘And where's the tinker?’

‘Drink put him in the hospital, guv'ner, and the hospital put him-- in
a glass-case, I HAVE heerd,’ Phil replies mysteriously.

‘By that means you got promotion? Took the business, Phil?’

‘Yes, commander, I took the business. Such as it was. It wasn't much
of a beat--round Saffron Hill, Hatton Garden, Clerkenwell, Smiffeld,
and there--poor neighbourhood, where they uses up the kettles till
they're past mending. Most of the tramping tinkers used to come and
lodge at our place; that was the best part of my master's earnings. But
they didn't come to me. I warn't like him. He could sing 'em a good
song. I couldn't! He could play 'em a tune on any sort of pot you
please, so as it was iron or block tin. I never could do nothing with a
pot but mend it or bile it--never had a note of music in me. Besides, I
was too ill-looking, and their wives complained of me.’

‘They were mighty particular. You would pass muster in a crowd, Phil!’
says the trooper with a pleasant smile.

‘No, guv'ner,’ returns Phil, shaking his head. ‘No, I shouldn't. I was
passable enough when I went with the tinker, though nothing to boast
of then; but what with blowing the fire with my mouth when I was
young, and spileing my complexion, and singeing my hair off, and
swallering the smoke, and what with being nat'rally unfort'nate in the
way of running against hot metal and marking myself by sich means,
and what with having turn-ups with the tinker as I got older, almost
whenever he was too far gone in drink--which was almost always--my
beauty was queer, wery queer, even at that time. As to since, what
with a dozen years in a dark forge where the men was given to larking,
and what with being scorched in a accident at a gas-works, and what
with being blowed out of winder case-filling at the firework business, I
am ugly enough to be made a show on!’

Resigning himself to which condition with a perfectly satisfied
manner, Phil begs the favour of another cup of coffee. While drinking
it, he says, It was after the case-filling blow-up when I first see you,
commander. You remember?’

‘T remember, Phil. You were walking along in the sun.’

‘Crawling, guv'ner, again a wall--’

‘True, Phil--shouldering your way on--’

‘In a night-cap!’ exclaims Phil, excited.

In a night-cap--’

‘And hobbling with a couple of sticks!’ cries Phil, still more excited.
‘With a couple of sticks. When--’

‘When you stops, you know,’ cries Phil, putting down his cup and
saucer and hastily removing his plate from his knees, ‘and says to me,
‘What, comrade! You have been in the wars!' I didn't say much to you,
commander, then, for I was took by surprise that a person so strong
and healthy and bold as you was should stop to speak to such a
limping bag of bones as I was. But you says to me, says you,
delivering it out of your chest as hearty as possible, so that it was like
a glass of something hot, 'What accident have you met with? You have
been badly hurt. What's amiss, old boy? Cheer up, and tell us about
it!’ Cheer up! I was cheered already! I says as much to you, you says
more to me, I says more to you, you says more to me, and here I am,
commander! Here I am, commander!’ cries Phil, who has started from
his chair and unaccountably begun to sidle away. If a mark's wanted,
or if it will improve the business, let the customers take aim at me.
They can't spoil MY beauty. I'M all right. Come on! If they want a man
to box at, let 'em box at me. Let 'em knock me well about the head. I
don't mind. If they want a light-weight to be throwed for practice,
Cornwall, Devonshire, or Lancashire, let 'em throw me. They won't
hurt ME. I have been throwed, all sorts of styles, all my life!’
With this unexpected speech, energetically delivered and accompanied
by action illustrative of the various exercises referred to, Phil Squod
shoulders his way round three sides of the gallery, and abruptly
tacking off at his commander, makes a butt at him with his head,
intended to express devotion to his service. He then begins to clear
away the breakfast.

Mr George, after laughing cheerfully and clapping him on the
shoulder, assists in these arrangements and helps to get the gallery
into business order. That done, he takes a turn at the dumb-bells,
and afterwards weighing himself and opining that he is getting ‘too
fleshy,’ engages with great gravity in solitary broadsword practice.
Meanwhile Phil has fallen to work at his usual table, where he screws
and umnscrews, and cleans, and files, and whistles into small
apertures, and blackens himself more and more, and seems to do and
undo everything that can be done and undone about a gun.

Master and man are at length disturbed by footsteps in the passage,
where they make an unusual sound, denoting the arrival of unusual
company. These steps, advancing nearer and nearer to the gallery,
bring into it a group at first sight scarcely reconcilable with any day in
the year but the fifth of November.

It consists of a limp and ugly figure carried in a chair by two bearers
and attended by a lean female with a face like a pinched mask, who
might be expected immediately to recite the popular verses
commemorative of the time when they did contrive to blow Old
England up alive but for her keeping her lips tightly and defiantly
closed as the chair is put down. At which point the figure in it
gasping, ‘O Lord! Oh, dear me! I am shaken!’ adds, ‘How de do, my
dear friend, how de do?’ Mr George then descries, in the procession,
the venerable Mr Smallweed out for an airing, attended by his
granddaughter Judy as body-guard.

‘Mr George, my dear friend,’ says Grandfather Smallweed, removing
his right arm from the neck of one of his bearers, whom he has nearly
throttled coming along, ‘how de do? You're surprised to see me, my
dear friend.’

T should hardly have been more surprised to have seen your friend in
the city,’ returns Mr George.

T am very seldom out,’ pants Mr Smallweed. I haven't been out for
many months. It's inconvenient--and it comes expensive. But I longed

so much to see you, my dear Mr George. How de do, sir?’

T am well enough,’ says Mr George. IT hope you are the same.’
‘You can't be too well, my dear friend.’ Mr Smallweed takes him by
both hands. ‘I have brought my granddaughter Judy. I couldn't keep
her away. She longed so much to see you.’

‘Hum! She bears it calmly!’ mutters Mr George.

‘So we got a hackney-cab, and put a chair in it, and just round the
corner they lifted me out of the cab and into the chair, and carried me
here that I might see my dear friend in his own establishment! This,’
says Grandfather Smallweed, alluding to the bearer, who has been in
danger of strangulation and who withdraws adjusting his windpipe, ‘is
the driver of the cab. He has nothing extra. It is by agreement
included in his fare. This person,’ the other bearer, ‘we engaged in the
street outside for a pint of beer. Which is twopence. Judy, give the
person twopence. I was not sure you had a workman of your own
here, my dear friend, or we needn't have employed this person.’

Grandfather Smallweed refers to Phil with a glance of considerable
terror and a half-subdued ‘O Lord! Oh, dear me!’ Nor in his
apprehension, on the surface of things, without some reason, for Phil,
who has never beheld the apparition in the black-velvet cap before,
has stopped short with a gun in his hand with much of the air of a
dead shot intent on picking Mr Smallweed off as an ugly old bird of
the crow species.

Judy, my child,’ says Grandfather Smallweed, ‘give the person his
twopence. It's a great deal for what he has done.’

The person, who is one of those extraordinary specimens of human
fungus that spring up spontaneously in the western streets of London,
ready dressed in an old red jacket, with a ‘mission’ for holding horses
and calling coaches, received his twopence with anything but
transport, tosses the money into the air, catches it over-handed, and
retires.

‘My dear Mr George,’ says Grandfather Smallweed, ‘would you be so
kind as help to carry me to the fire? I am accustomed to a fire, and I
am an old man, and I soon chill. Oh, dear me!’

His closing exclamation is jerked out of the venerable gentleman by
the suddenness with which Mr Squod, like a genie, catches him up,
chair and all, and deposits him on the hearth-stone.

‘O Lord!’ says Mr Smallweed, panting. ‘Oh, dear me! Oh, my stars! My
dear friend, your workman is very strong--and very prompt. O Lord,
he is very prompt! Judy, draw me back a little. I'm being scorched in
the legs,’ which indeed is testified to the noses of all present by the
smell of his worsted stockings.
The gentle Judy, having backed her grandfather a little way from the
fire, and having shaken him up as usual, and having released his
overshadowed eye from its black-velvet extinguisher, Mr Smallweed
again says, ‘Oh, dear me! O Lord!’ and looking about and meeting Mr
George's glance, again stretches out both hands.

‘My dear friend! So happy in this meeting! And this is your
establishment? It's a delightful place. It's a picture! You never find
that anything goes off here accidentally, do you, my dear friend?’ adds
Grandfather Smallweed, very ill at ease.

‘No, no. No fear of that.’

‘And your workman. He--Oh, dear me!--he never lets anything off
without meaning it, does he, my dear friend?’

‘He has never hurt anybody but himself,’ says Mr George, smiling.

‘But he might, you know. He seems to have hurt himself a good deal,
and he might hurt somebody else,’ the old gentleman returns. ‘He
mightn't mean it--or he even might. Mr George, will you order him to
leave his infernal fire-arms alone and go away?’

Obedient to a nod from the trooper, Phil retires, empty-handed, to the
other end of the gallery. Mr Smallweed, reassured, falls to rubbing his
legs.

‘And you're doing well, Mr George?’ he says to the trooper, squarely
standing faced about towards him with his broadsword in his hand.
‘You are prospering, please the Powers?’

Mr George answers with a cool nod, adding, ‘Go on. You have not
come to say that, I know.’

‘You are so sprightly, Mr George,’ returns the venerable grandfather.
‘You are such good company.’

‘Ha ha! Go on!’ says Mr George.

‘My dear friend! But that sword looks awful gleaming and sharp. It
might cut somebody, by accident. It makes me shiver, Mr George.
Curse him!’ says the excellent old gentleman apart to Judy as the
trooper takes a step or two away to lay it aside. ‘He owes me money,
and might think of paying off old scores in this murdering place. I
wish your brimstone grandmother was here, and he'd shave her head
off.’
Mr George, returning, folds his arms, and looking down at the old
man, sliding every moment lower and lower in his chair, says quietly,
‘Now for it!’

‘Ho!’ cries Mr Smallweed, rubbing his hands with an artful chuckle.
‘Yes. Now for it. Now for what, my dear friend?’

‘For a pipe,’ says Mr George, who with great composure sets his chair
in the chimney-corner, takes his pipe from the grate, fills it and lights
it, and falls to smoking peacefully.

This tends to the discomfiture of Mr Smallweed, who finds it so
difficult to resume his object, whatever it may be, that he becomes
exasperated and secretly claws the air with an impotent vindictiveness
expressive of an intense desire to tear and rend the visage of Mr
George. As the excellent old gentleman's nails are long and leaden,
and his hands lean and veinous, and his eyes green and watery; and,
over and above this, as he continues, while he claws, to slide down in
his chair and to collapse into a shapeless bundle, he becomes such a
ghastly spectacle, even in the accustomed eyes of Judy, that that
young virgin pounces at him with something more than the ardour of
affection and so shakes him up and pats and pokes him in divers
parts of his body, but particularly in that part which the science of
self-defence would call his wind, that in his grievous distress he utters
enforced sounds like a paviour's rammer.

When Judy has by these means set him up again in his chair, with a
white face and a frosty nose (but still clawing), she stretches out her
weazen forefinger and gives Mr George one poke in the back. The
trooper raising his head, she makes another poke at her esteemed
grandfather, and having thus brought them together, stares rigidly at
the fire.

‘Aye, aye! Ho, ho! U--u--u--ugh!’ chatters Grandfather Smallweed,
swallowing his rage. ‘My dear friend!’ (still clawing).

T tell you what,’ says Mr George. ‘If you want to converse with me, you
must speak out. I am one of the roughs, and I can't go about and
about. I haven't the art to do it. I am not clever enough. It don't suit
me. When you go winding round and round me,’ says the trooper,
putting his pipe between his lips again, ‘damme, if I don't feel as if I
was being smothered!’

And he inflates his broad chest to its utmost extent as if to assure
himself that he is not smothered yet.

If you have come to give me a friendly call,’ continues Mr George, 1
am obliged to you; how are you? If you have come to see whether
there's any property on the premises, look about you; you are
welcome. If you want to out with something, out with it!’

The blooming Judy, without removing her gaze from the fire, gives her
grandfather one ghostly poke.

‘You see! It's her opinion too. And why the devil that young woman
won't sit down like a Christian,’ says Mr George with his eyes
musingly fixed on Judy, I can't comprehend.’

‘She keeps at my side to attend to me, sir,’ says Grandfather
Smallweed. I am an old man, my dear Mr George, and I need some
attention. I can carry my years; I am not a brimstone poll-parrot’
(snarling and looking unconsciously for the cushion), ‘but I need
attention, my dear friend.’

‘Well!’ returns the trooper, wheeling his chair to face the old man.
‘Now then?’

‘My friend in the city, Mr George, has done a little business with a
pupil of yours.’

‘Has he?’ says Mr George. ‘I am sorry to hear it.’

Yes, sir.’ Grandfather Smallweed rubs his legs. ‘He is a fine young
soldier now, Mr George, by the name of Carstone. Friends came
forward and paid it all up, honourable.’ ‘Did they?’ returns Mr George.
‘Do you think your friend in the city would like a piece of advice?’

T think he would, my dear friend. From you.’

T advise him, then, to do no more business in that quarter. There's no
more to be got by it. The young gentleman, to my knowledge, is
brought to a dead halt.’

‘No, no, my dear friend. No, no, Mr George. No, no, no, sir,’
remonstrates Grandfather Smallweed, cunningly rubbing his spare
legs. ‘Not quite a dead halt, I think. He has good friends, and he is
good for his pay, and he is good for the selling price of his
commission, and he is good for his chance in a lawsuit, and he is good
for his chance in a wife, and--oh, do you know, Mr George, I think my
friend would consider the young gentleman good for something yet?’
says Grandfather Smallweed, turning up his velvet cap and scratching
his ear like a monkey.

Mr George, who has put aside his pipe and sits with an arm on his
chair-back, beats a tattoo on the ground with his right foot as if he
were not particularly pleased with the turn the conversation has
taken.

‘But to pass from one subject to another,’ resumes Mr Smallweed. “To
promote the conversation,’ as a joker might say. To pass, Mr George,
from the ensign to the captain.’

‘What are you up to, now?’ asks Mr George, pausing with a frown in
stroking the recollection of his moustache. ‘What captain?’

‘Our captain. The captain we know of. Captain Hawdon.’

‘Oh! That's it, is it?’ says Mr George with a low whistle as he sees both
grandfather and granddaughter looking hard at him. ‘You are there!
Well? What about it? Come, I won't be smothered any more. Speak!’

‘My dear friend,’ returns the old man, IT was applied--Judy, shake me
up a little!--I was applied to yesterday about the captain, and my
opinion still is that the captain is not dead.’

‘Bosh!’ observes Mr George.

‘What was your remark, my dear friend?’ inquires the old man with
his hand to his ear.

Bosh!’

‘Ho!’ says Grandfather Smallweed. ‘Mr George, of my opinion you can
judge for yourself according to the questions asked of me and the
reasons given for asking 'em. Now, what do you think the lawyer
making the inquiries wants?’

‘A job,’ says Mr George.
‘Nothing of the kind!’

‘Can't be a lawyer, then,’ says Mr George, folding his arms with an air
of confirmed resolution.

‘My dear friend, he is a lawyer, and a famous one. He wants to see
some fragment in Captain Hawdon's writing. He don't want to keep it.
He only wants to see it and compare it with a writing in his
possession.’

‘Well?’

‘Well, Mr George. Happening to remember the advertisement
concerning Captain Hawdon and any information that could be given
respecting him, he looked it up and came to me--just as you did, my
dear friend. WILL you shake hands? So glad you came that day! I
should have missed forming such a friendship if you hadn't come!’

‘Well, Mr Smallweed?’ says Mr George again after going through the
ceremony with some stiffness.

T had no such thing. I have nothing but his signature. Plague
pestilence and famine, battle murder and sudden death upon him,’
says the old man, making a curse out of one of his few remembrances
of a prayer and squeezing up his velvet cap between his angry hands,
T have half a million of his signatures, I think! But you,’ breathlessly
recovering his mildness of speech as Judy re- adjusts the cap on his
skittle-ball of a head, ‘you, my dear Mr George, are likely to have some
letter or paper that would suit the purpose. Anything would suit the
purpose, written in the hand.’

‘Some writing in that hand,’ says the trooper, pondering; ‘may be, I
have.’

‘My dearest friend!’
‘May be, I have not.’
‘Ho!’ says Grandfather Smallweed, crest-fallen.

‘But if I had bushels of it, I would not show as much as would make a
cartridge without knowing why.’

‘Sir, I have told you why. My dear Mr George, I have told you why.’

‘Not enough,’ says the trooper, shaking his head. I must know more,
and approve it.’

‘Then, will you come to the lawyer? My dear friend, will you come and
see the gentleman?’ urges Grandfather Smallweed, pulling out a lean
old silver watch with hands like the leg of a skeleton. I told him it was
probable I might call upon him between ten and eleven this forenoon,
and it's now half after ten. Will you come and see the gentleman, Mr
George?’

‘Hum!’ says he gravely. I don't mind that. Though why this should
concern you so much, I don't know.’

‘Everything concerns me that has a chance in it of bringing anything
to light about him. Didn't he take us all in? Didn't he owe us immense
sums, all round? Concern me? Who can anything about him concern
more than me? Not, my dear friend,’ says Grandfather Smallweed,
lowering his tone, ‘that I want YOU to betray anything. Far from it. Are
you ready to come, my dear friend?’

‘Aye! I'll come in a moment. I promise nothing, you know.’
‘No, my dear Mr George; no.’

‘And you mean to say you're going to give me a lift to this place,
wherever it is, without charging for it?’ Mr George inquires, getting his
hat and thick wash-leather gloves.

This pleasantry so tickles Mr Smallweed that he laughs, long and low,
before the fire. But ever while he laughs, he glances over his paralytic
shoulder at Mr George and eagerly watches him as he unlocks the
padlock of a homely cupboard at the distant end of the gallery, looks
here and there upon the higher shelves, and ultimately takes
something out with a rustling of paper, folds it, and puts it in his
breast. Then Judy pokes Mr Smallweed once, and Mr Smallweed
pokes Judy once.

T am ready,’ says the trooper, coming back. ‘Phil, you can carry this
old gentleman to his coach, and make nothing of him.’

‘Oh, dear me! O Lord! Stop a moment!’ says Mr Smallweed. ‘He's so
very prompt! Are you sure you can do it carefully, my worthy man?’

Phil makes no reply, but seizing the chair and its load, sidles away,
tightly hugged by the now speechless Mr Smallweed, and bolts along
the passage as if he had an acceptable commission to carry the old
gentleman to the nearest volcano. His shorter trust, however,
terminating at the cab, he deposits him there; and the fair Judy takes
her place beside him, and the chair embellishes the roof, and Mr
George takes the vacant place upon the box.

Mr George is quite confounded by the spectacle he beholds from time
to time as he peeps into the cab through the window behind him,
where the grim Judy is always motionless, and the old gentleman with
his cap over one eye is always sliding off the seat into the straw and
looking upward at him out of his other eye with a helpless expression
of being jolted in the back.
Chapter XXVII - More Old Soldiers Than One

Mr George has not far to ride with folded arms upon the box, for their
destination is Lincoln's Inn Fields. When the driver stops his horses,
Mr George alights, and looking in at the window, says, ‘What, Mr
Tulkinghorn's your man, is he?’

‘Yes, my dear friend. Do you know him, Mr George?’

‘Why, I have heard of him--seen him too, I think. But I don't know
him, and he don't know me.’

There ensues the carrying of Mr Smallweed upstairs, which is done to
perfection with the trooper's help. He is borne into Mr Tulkinghorn's
great room and deposited on the Turkey rug before the fire. Mr
Tulkinghorn is not within at the present moment but will be back
directly. The occupant of the pew in the hall, having said thus much,
stirs the fire and leaves the triumvirate to warm themselves.

Mr George is mightily curious in respect of the room. He looks up at
the painted ceiling, looks round at the old law-books, contemplates
the portraits of the great clients, reads aloud the names on the boxes.

“Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet,'‘ Mr George reads thoughtfully. ‘Ha!
"Manor of Chesney Wold.' Humph!’ Mr George stands looking at these
boxes a long while--as if they were pictures--and comes back to the
fire repeating, ‘Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, and Manor of Chesney
Wold, hey?’

‘Worth a mint of money, Mr George!’ whispers Grandfather Smallweed,
rubbing his legs. ‘Powerfully rich!’

‘Who do you mean? This old gentleman, or the Baronet?’
‘This gentleman, this gentleman.’

‘So I have heard; and knows a thing or two, I'll hold a wager. Not bad
quarters, either,’ says Mr George, looking round again. ‘SSee the
strong-box yonder!’

This reply is cut short by Mr Tulkinghorn's arrival. There is no change
in him, of course. Rustily drest, with his spectacles in his hand, and
their very case worn threadbare. In manner, close and dry. In voice,
husky and low. In face, watchful behind a blind; habitually not
uncensorious and contemptuous perhaps. The peerage may have
warmer worshippers and faithfuller believers than Mr Tulkinghorn,
after all, if everything were known.
‘Good morning, Mr Smallweed, good morning!’ he says as he comes in.
‘You have brought the sergeant, I see. Sit down, sergeant.’

As Mr Tulkinghorn takes off his gloves and puts them in his hat, he
looks with half-closed eyes across the room to where the trooper
stands and says within himself perchance, ‘You'll do, my friend!’

‘Sit down, sergeant,’ he repeats as he comes to his table, which is set
on one side of the fire, and takes his easy-chair. ‘Cold and raw this
morning, cold and raw!’ Mr Tulkinghorn warms before the bars,
alternately, the palms and knuckles of his hands and looks (from
behind that blind which is always down) at the trio sitting in a little
semicircle before him.

‘Now, I can feel what I am about’ (as perhaps he can in two senses),
‘Mr Smallweed.’ The old gentleman is newly shaken up by Judy to
bear his part in the conversation. ‘You have brought our good friend
the sergeant, I see.’

Yes, sir,’ returns Mr Smallweed, very servile to the lawyer's wealth
and influence.

‘And what does the sergeant say about this business?’

‘Mr George,’ says Grandfather Smallweed with a tremulous wave of his
shrivelled hand, ‘this is the gentleman, sir.’

Mr George salutes the gentleman but otherwise sits bolt upright and
profoundly silent--very forward in his chair, as if the full complement

of regulation appendages for a field-day hung about him.

Mr Tulkinghorn proceeds, ‘Well, George--I believe your name is
George?’

It is so, Sir.’
‘What do you say, George?’

T ask your pardon, sir,’ returns the trooper, ‘but I should wish to
know what YOU say?’

‘Do you mean in point of reward?’
T mean in point of everything, sir.’

This is so very trying to Mr Smallweed's temper that he suddenly
breaks out with ‘You're a brimstone beast!’ and as suddenly asks
pardon of Mr Tulkinghorn, excusing himself for this slip of the tongue
by saying to Judy, I was thinking of your grandmother, my dear.’

T supposed, sergeant,’ Mr Tulkinghorn resumes as he leans on one
side of his chair and crosses his legs, ‘that Mr Smallweed might have
sufficiently explained the matter. It lies in the smallest compass,
however. You served under Captain Hawdon at one time, and were his
attendant in illness, and rendered him many little services, and were
rather in his confidence, I am told. That is so, is it not?’

‘Yes, sir, that is so,’ says Mr George with military brevity.

Therefore you may happen to have in your possession something--
anything, no matter what; accounts, instructions, orders, a letter,
anything--in Captain Hawdon's writing. I wish to compare his writing
with some that I have. If you can give me the opportunity, you shall be
rewarded for your trouble. Three, four, five, guineas, you would
consider handsome, I dare say.’

‘Noble, my dear friend!’ cries Grandfather Smallweed, screwing up his
eyes.

Tf not, say how much more, in your conscience as a soldier, you can
demand. There is no need for you to part with the writing, against
your inclination--though I should prefer to have it.’

Mr George sits squared in exactly the same attitude, looks at the
painted ceiling, and says never a word. The irascible Mr Smallweed
scratches the air.

‘The question is,’ says Mr Tulkinghorn in his methodical, subdued,
uninterested way, ‘first, whether you have any of Captain Hawdon's

writing?’

‘First, whether I have any of Captain Hawdon's writing, sir,’ repeats
Mr George.

‘Secondly, what will satisfy you for the trouble of producing it?’

‘Secondly, what will satisfy me for the trouble of producing it, sir,’
repeats Mr George.

Thirdly, you can judge for yourself whether it is at all like that,’ says
Mr Tulkinghorn, suddenly handing him some sheets of written paper

tied together.

‘Whether it is at all like that, sir. Just so,’ repeats Mr George.
All three repetitions Mr George pronounces in a mechanical manner,
looking straight at Mr Tulkinghorn; nor does he so much as glance at
the affidavit in Jarndyce and Jarndyce, that has been given to him for
his inspection (though he still holds it in his hand), but continues to
look at the lawyer with an air of troubled meditation.

‘Well?’ says Mr Tulkinghorn. ‘What do you say?’

‘Well, sir,’ replies Mr George, rising erect and looking immense, 1T
would rather, if you'll excuse me, have nothing to do with this.’

Mr Tulkinghorn, outwardly quite undisturbed, demands, ‘Why not?’

‘Why, sir,’ returns the trooper. ‘Except on military compulsion, I am
not a man of business. Among civilians I am what they call in
Scotland a ne'er-do-weel. I have no head for papers, sir. I can stand
any fire better than a fire of cross questions. I mentioned to Mr
Smallweed, only an hour or so ago, that when I come into things of
this kind I feel as if I was being smothered. And that is my sensation,’
says Mr George, looking round upon the company, ‘at the present
moment.’

With that, he takes three strides forward to replace the papers on the
lawyer's table and three strides backward to resume his former
station, where he stands perfectly upright, now looking at the ground
and now at the painted ceiling, with his hands behind him as if to
prevent himself from accepting any other document whatever.

Under this provocation, Mr Smallweed's favourite adjective of
disparagement is so close to his tongue that he begins the words ‘my
dear friend’ with the monosyllable ‘brim,’ thus converting the
possessive pronoun into brimmy and appearing to have an
impediment in his speech. Once past this difficulty, however, he
exhorts his dear friend in the tenderest manner not to be rash, but to
do what so eminent a gentleman requires, and to do it with a good
grace, confident that it must be unobjectionable as well as profitable.
Mr Tulkinghorn merely utters an occasional sentence, as, ‘You are the
best judge of your own interest, sergeant.’ ‘Take care you do no harm
by this.’ ‘Please yourself, please yourself.’ If you know what you mean,
that's quite enough.’ These he utters with an appearance of perfect
indifference as he looks over the papers on his table and prepares to
write a letter.

Mr George looks distrustfully from the painted ceiling to the ground,
from the ground to Mr Smallweed, from Mr Smallweed to Mr
Tulkinghorn, and from Mr Tulkinghorn to the painted ceiling again,
often in his perplexity changing the leg on which he rests.
T do assure you, sir,’ says Mr George, ‘not to say it offensively, that
between you and Mr Smallweed here, I really am being smothered fifty
times over. I really am, sir. I am not a match for you gentlemen. Will
you allow me to ask why you want to see the captain's hand, in the
case that I could find any specimen of it?’

Mr Tulkinghorn quietly shakes his head. ‘No. If you were a man of
business, sergeant, you would not need to be informed that there are
confidential reasons, very harmless in themselves, for many such
wants in the profession to which I belong. But if you are afraid of
doing any injury to Captain Hawdon, you may set your mind at rest
about that.’

‘Aye! He is dead, sir.’
IS he?’ Mr Tulkinghorn quietly sits down to write.

‘Well, sir,’ says the trooper, looking into his hat after another
disconcerted pause, ‘| am sorry not to have given you more
satisfaction. If it would be any satisfaction to any one that I should be
confirmed in my judgment that I would rather have nothing to do with
this by a friend of mine who has a better head for business than I
have, and who is an old soldier, I am willing to consult with him. I--I
really am so completely smothered myself at present,’ says Mr George,
passing his hand hopelessly across his brow, ‘that I don't know but
what it might be a satisfaction to me.’

Mr Smallweed, hearing that this authority is an old soldier, so
strongly inculcates the expediency of the trooper's taking counsel with
him, and particularly informing him of its being a question of five
guineas or more, that Mr George engages to go and see him. Mr
Tulkinghorn says nothing either way.

Tll consult my friend, then, by your leave, sir,’ says the trooper, ‘and
I'll take the liberty of looking in again with the final answer in the
course of the day. Mr Smallweed, if you wish to be carried downstairs-

?

In a moment, my dear friend, in a moment. Will you first let me speak
half a word with this gentleman in private?’

‘Certainly, sir. Don't hurry yourself on my account.’ The trooper
retires to a distant part of the room and resumes his curious
inspection of the boxes, strong and otherwise.

Tf I wasn't as weak as a brimstone baby, sir,’ whispers Grandfather
Smallweed, drawing the lawyer down to his level by the lapel of his
coat and flashing some half-quenched green fire out of his angry eyes,
Td tear the writing away from him. He's got it buttoned in his breast. I
saw him put it there. Judy saw him put it there. Speak up, you
crabbed image for the sign of a walking- stick shop, and say you saw
him put it there!’

This vehement conjuration the old gentleman accompanies with such
a thrust at his granddaughter that it is too much for his strength, and
he slips away out of his chair, drawing Mr Tulkinghorn with him, until
he is arrested by Judy, and well shaken.

Violence will not do for me, my friend,’ Mr Tulkinghorn then remarks
coolly.

‘No, no, I know, I know, sir. But it's chafing and galling--it's-- it's
worse than your smattering chattering magpie of a grandmother,’ to
the imperturbable Judy, who only looks at the fire, ‘to know he has
got what's wanted and won't give it up. He, not to give it up! HE! A
vagabond! But never mind, sir, never mind. At the most, he has only
his own way for a little while. I have him periodically in a vice. I'll twist
him, sir. I'll screw him, sir. If he won't do it with a good grace, I'll
make him do it with a bad one, sir! Now, my dear Mr George,’ says
Grandfather Smallweed, winking at the lawyer hideously as he
releases him, I am ready for your kind assistance, my excellent
friend!’

Mr Tulkinghorn, with some shadowy sign of amusement manifesting
itself through his self-possession, stands on the hearth-rug with his
back to the fire, watching the disappearance of Mr Smallweed and
acknowledging the trooper's parting salute with one slight nod.

It is more difficult to get rid of the old gentleman, Mr George finds,
than to bear a hand in carrying him downstairs, for when he is
replaced in his conveyance, he is so loquacious on the subject of the
guineas and retains such an affectionate hold of his button --having,
in truth, a secret longing to rip his coat open and rob him--that some
degree of force is necessary on the trooper's part to effect a separation.
It is accomplished at last, and he proceeds alone in quest of his
adviser.

By the cloisterly Temple, and by Whitefriars (there, not without a
glance at Hanging-Sword Alley, which would seem to be something in
his way), and by Blackfriars Bridge, and Blackfriars Road, Mr George
sedately marches to a street of little shops lying somewhere in that
ganglion of roads from Kent and Surrey, and of streets from the
bridges of London, centring in the far-famed elephant who has lost his
castle formed of a thousand four-horse coaches to a stronger iron
monster than he, ready to chop him into mince-meat any day he
dares. To one of the little shops in this street, which is a musician's
shop, having a few fiddles in the window, and some Pan's pipes and a
tambourine, and a triangle, and certain elongated scraps of music, Mr
George directs his massive tread. And halting at a few paces from it,
as he sees a Soldierly looking woman, with her outer skirts tucked up,
come forth with a small wooden tub, and in that tub commence a-
whisking and a-splashing on the margin of the pavement, Mr George
says to himself, ‘She's as usual, washing greens. I never saw her,
except upon a baggage-waggon, when she wasn't washing greens!’

The subject of this reflection is at all events so occupied in washing
greens at present that she remains unsuspicious of Mr George's
approach until, lifting up herself and her tub together when she has
poured the water off into the gutter, she finds him standing near her.
Her reception of him is not flattering.

‘George, I never see you but I wish you was a hundred mile away!’

The trooper, without remarking on this welcome, follows into the
musical-instrument shop, where the lady places her tub of greens
upon the counter, and having shaken hands with him, rests her arms
upon it.

T never,’ she says, ‘George, consider Matthew Bagnet safe a minute
when you're near him. You are that restless and that roving--’

‘Yes! I know I am, Mrs Bagnet. I know I am.’

‘You know you are!’ says Mrs Bagnet. ‘What's the use of that? WHY
are you?’

The nature of the animal, I suppose,’ returns the trooper good-
humouredly.

‘Ah!’ cries Mrs Bagnet, something shrilly. ‘But what satisfaction will
the nature of the animal be to me when the animal shall have tempted
my Mat away from the musical business to New Zealand or
Australey?’

Mrs Bagnet is not at all an ill-looking woman. Rather large- boned, a
little coarse in the grain, and freckled by the sun and wind which have
tanned her hair upon the forehead, but healthy, wholesome, and
bright-eyed. A strong, busy, active, honest-faced woman of from forty-
five to fifty. Clean, hardy, and so economically dressed (though
substantially) that the only article of ornament of which she stands
possessed appear's to be her wedding-ring, around which her finger
has grown to be so large since it was put on that it will never come off
again until it shall mingle with Mrs Bagnet's dust.
‘Mrs Bagnet,’ says the trooper, IT am on my parole with you. Mat will
get no harm from me. You may trust me so far.’

‘Well, I think I may. But the very looks of you are unsettling,’ Mrs
Bagnet rejoins. ‘Ah, George, George! If you had only settled down and
married Joe Pouch's widow when he died in North America, SHE'D
have combed your hair for you.’

‘It was a chance for me, certainly,’ returns the trooper half laughingly,
half seriously, ‘but I shall never settle down into a respectable man
now. Joe Pouch's widow might have done me good-- there was
something in her, and something of her--but I couldn't make up my
mind to it. If I had had the luck to meet with such a wife as Mat
found!’

Mrs Bagnet, who seems in a virtuous way to be under little reserve
with a good sort of fellow, but to be another good sort of fellow herself
for that matter, receives this compliment by flicking Mr George in the
face with a head of greens and taking her tub into the little room
behind the shop.

‘Why, Quebec, my poppet,’ says George, following, on invitation, into
that department. ‘And little Malta, too! Come and kiss your Bluffy!’

These young ladies--not supposed to have been actually christened by
the names applied to them, though always so called in the family from
the places of their birth in barracks--are respectively employed on
three-legged stools, the younger (some five or six years old) in learning
her letters out of a penny primer, the elder (eight or nine perhaps) in
teaching her and sewing with great assiduity. Both hail Mr George
with acclamations as an old friend and after some kissing and
romping plant their stools beside him.

‘And how's young Woolwich?’ says Mr George.

‘Ah! There now!’ cries Mrs Bagnet, turning about from her saucepans
(for she is cooking dinner) with a bright flush on her face. ‘Would you
believe it? Got an engagement at the theayter, with his father, to play
the fife in a military piece.’

‘Well done, my godson!’ cries Mr George, slapping his thigh.

T believe you!’ says Mrs Bagnet. ‘He's a Briton. That's what Woolwich
is. A Briton!’

‘And Mat blows away at his bassoon, and you're respectable civilians
one and all,’ says Mr George. ‘Family people. Children growing up.
Mat's old mother in Scotland, and your old father somewhere else,
corresponded with, and helped a little, and--well, well! To be sure, I
don't know why I shouldn't be wished a hundred mile away, for I have
not much to do with all this!’

Mr George is becoming thoughtful, sitting before the fire in the
whitewashed room, which has a sanded floor and a barrack smell and
contains nothing superfluous and has not a visible speck of dirt or
dust in it, from the faces of Quebec and Malta to the bright tin pots
and pannikins upon the dresser shelves--Mr George is becoming
thoughtful, sitting here while Mrs Bagnet is busy, when Mr Bagnet
and young Woolwich opportunely come home. Mr Bagnet is an ex-
artilleryman, tall and upright, with shaggy eyebrows and whiskers like
the fibres of a coco-nut, not a hair upon his head, and a torrid
complexion. His voice, short, deep, and resonant, is not at all unlike
the tones of the instrument to which he is devoted. Indeed there may
be generally observed in him an unbending, unyielding, brass-bound
air, as if he were himself the bassoon of the human orchestra. Young
Woolwich is the type and model of a young drummer.

Both father and son salute the trooper heartily. He saying, in due
season, that he has come to advise with Mr Bagnet, Mr Bagnet
hospitably declares that he will hear of no business until after dinner
and that his friend shall not partake of his counsel without first
partaking of boiled pork and greens. The trooper yielding to this
invitation, he and Mr Bagnet, not to embarrass the domestic
preparations, go forth to take a turn up and down the little street,
which they promenade with measured tread and folded arms, as if it
were a rampart.

‘George,’ says Mr Bagnet. ‘You know me. It's my old girl that advises.
She has the head. But I never own to it before her. Discipline must be
maintained. Wait till the greens is off her mind. Then we'll consult.
Whatever the old girl says, do--do it!’

T intend to, Mat,’ replies the other. ‘I would sooner take her opinion
than that of a college.’

‘College,’ returns Mr Bagnet in short sentences, bassoon-like. ‘What
college could you leave--in another quarter of the world-- with nothing
but a grey cloak and an umbrella--to make its way home to Europe?
The old girl would do it to-morrow. Did it once!’

‘You are right,’ says Mr George.

‘What college,’ pursues Bagnet, ‘could you set up in life--with two
penn'orth of white lime--a penn'orth of fuller's earth--a ha'porth of
sand--and the rest of the change out of sixpence in money? That's
what the old girl started on. In the present business.’
T am rejoiced to hear it's thriving, Mat.’

‘The old girl,’ says Mr Bagnet, acquiescing, ‘saves. Has a stocking
somewhere. With money in it. I never saw it. But I know she's got it.
Wait till the greens is off her mind. Then she'll set you up.’

‘She is a treasure!’ exclaims Mr George.

‘She's more. But I never own to it before her. Discipline must be
maintained. It was the old girl that brought out my musical abilities. I
should have been in the artillery now but for the old girl. Six years I
hammered at the fiddle. Ten at the flute. The old girl said it wouldn't
do; intention good, but want of flexibility; try the bassoon. The old girl
borrowed a bassoon from the bandmaster of the Rifle Regiment. I
practised in the trenches. Got on, got another, get a living by it!’

George remarks that she looks as fresh as a rose and as sound as an
apple.

‘The old girl,’ says Mr Bagnet in reply, ‘is a thoroughly fine woman.
Consequently she is like a thoroughly fine day. Gets finer as she gets
on. I never saw the old girl's equal. But I never own to it before her.
Discipline must be maintained!’

Proceeding to converse on indifferent matters, they walk up and down
the little street, keeping step and time, until summoned by Quebec
and Malta to do justice to the pork and greens, over which Mrs
Bagnet, like a military chaplain, says a short grace. In the distribution
of these comestibles, as in every other household duty, Mrs Bagnet
developes an exact system, sitting with every dish before her, allotting
to every portion of pork its own portion of pot-liquor, greens, potatoes,
and even mustard, and serving it out complete. Having likewise served
out the beer from a can and thus supplied the mess with all things
necessary, Mrs Bagnet proceeds to satisfy her own hunger, which is in
a healthy state. The kit of the mess, if the table furniture may be so
denominated, is chiefly composed of utensils of horn and tin that have
done duty in several parts of the world. Young Woolwich's knife, in
particular, which is of the oyster kind, with the additional feature of a
strong shutting-up movement which frequently balks the appetite of
that young musician, is mentioned as having gone in various hands
the complete round of foreign service.

The dinner done, Mrs Bagnet, assisted by the younger branches (who
polish their own cups and platters, knives and forks), makes all the
dinner garniture shine as brightly as before and puts it all away, first
sweeping the hearth, to the end that Mr Bagnet and the visitor may
not be retarded in the smoking of their pipes. These household cares
involve much pattening and counter-pattening in the backyard and
considerable use of a pail, which is finally so happy as to assist in the
ablutions of Mrs Bagnet herself. That old girl reappearing by and by,
quite fresh, and sitting down to her needlework, then and only then--
the greens being only then to be considered as entirely off her mind--
Mr Bagnet requests the trooper to state his case.

This Mr George does with great discretion, appearing to address
himself to Mr Bagnet, but having an eye solely on the old girl all the
time, as Bagnet has himself. She, equally discreet, busies herself with
her needlework. The case fully stated, Mr Bagnet resorts to his
standard artifice for the maintenance of discipline.

‘That's the whole of it, is it, George?’ says he.
‘That's the whole of it.’

‘You act according to my opinion?’

T shall be guided,’ replies George, ‘entirely by it.’

‘Old girl,’ says Mr Bagnet, ‘give him my opinion. You know it. Tell him
what it is.’

It is that he cannot have too little to do with people who are too deep
for him and cannot be too careful of interference with matters he does
not understand--that the plain rule is to do nothing in the dark, to be
a party to nothing underhanded or mysterious, and never to put his
foot where he cannot see the ground. This, in effect, is Mr Bagnet's
opinion, as delivered through the old girl, and it so relieves Mr
George's mind by confirming his own opinion and banishing his
doubts that he composes himself to smoke another pipe on that
exceptional occasion and to have a talk over old times with the whole
Bagnet family, according to their various ranges of experience.

Through these means it comes to pass that Mr George does not again
rise to his full height in that parlour until the time is drawing on when
the bassoon and fife are expected by a British public at the theatre;
and as it takes time even then for Mr George, in his domestic
character of Bluffy, to take leave of Quebec and Malta and insinuate a
sponsorial shilling into the pocket of his godson with felicitations on
his success in life, it is dark when Mr George again turns his face
towards Lincoln's Inn Fields.

‘A family home,’ he ruminates as he marches along, ‘however small it
is, makes a man like me look lonely. But it's well I never made that
evolution of matrimony. I shouldn't have been fit for it. Iam such a
vagabond still, even at my present time of life, that I couldn't hold to
the gallery a month together if it was a regular pursuit or if I didn't
camp there, gipsy fashion. Come! I disgrace nobody and cumber
nobody; that's something. I have not done that for many a long year!’

So he whistles it off and marches on.

Arrived in Lincoln's Inn Fields and mounting Mr Tulkinghorn's stair,
he finds the outer door closed and the chambers shut, but the trooper
not knowing much about outer doors, and the staircase being dark
besides, he is yet fumbling and groping about, hoping to discover a
bell-handle or to open the door for himself, when Mr Tulkinghorn
comes up the stairs (quietly, of course) and angrily asks, ‘Who is that?
What are you doing there?’

T ask your pardon, sir. It's George. The sergeant.’
‘And couldn't George, the sergeant, see that my door was locked?’

‘Why, no, sir, I couldn't. At any rate, I didn't,’ says the trooper, rather
nettled.

‘Have you changed your mind? Or are you in the same mind?’ Mr
Tulkinghorn demands. But he knows well enough at a glance.

‘In the same mind, sir.’

T thought so. That's sufficient. You can go. So you are the man,’ says
Mr Tulkinghorn, opening his door with the key, ‘in whose hiding-place
Mr Gridley was found?’

‘Yes, I AM the man,’ says the trooper, stopping two or three stairs
down. ‘What then, sir?’

‘What then? I don't like your associates. You should not have seen the
inside of my door this morning if I had thought of your being that
man. Gridley? A threatening, murderous, dangerous fellow.’

With these words, spoken in an unusually high tone for him, the
lawyer goes into his rooms and shuts the door with a thundering
noise.

Mr George takes his dismissal in great dudgeon, the greater because a
clerk coming up the stairs has heard the last words of all and
evidently applies them to him. ‘A pretty character to bear,’ the trooper
growls with a hasty oath as he strides downstairs. ‘A threatening,
murderous, dangerous fellow!’ And looking up, he sees the clerk
looking down at him and marking him as he passes a lamp. This so
intensifies his dudgeon that for five minutes he is in an ill humour.
But he whistles that off like the rest of it and marches home to the
shooting gallery.
Chapter XXVIII - The Ironmaster

Sir Leicester Dedlock has got the better, for the time being, of the
family gout and is once more, in a literal no less than in a figurative
point of view, upon his legs. He is at his place in Lincolnshire; but the
waters are out again on the low-lying grounds, and the cold and damp
steal into Chesney Wold, though well defended, and eke into Sir
Leicester's bones. The blazing fires of faggot and coal--Dedlock timber
and antediluvian forest--that blaze upon the broad wide hearths and
wink in the twilight on the frowning woods, sullen to see how trees are
sacrificed, do not exclude the enemy. The hot-water pipes that trail
themselves all over the house, the cushioned doors and windows, and
the screens and curtains fail to supply the fires' deficiencies and to
satisfy Sir Leicester's need. Hence the fashionable intelligence
proclaims one morning to the listening earth that Lady Dedlock is
expected shortly to return to town for a few weeks.

It is a melancholy truth that even great men have their poor relations.
Indeed great men have often more than their fair share of poor
relations, inasmuch as very red blood of the superior quality, like
inferior blood unlawfully shed, WILL cry aloud and WILL be heard. Sir
Leicester's cousins, in the remotest degree, are so many murders in
the respect that they ‘will out.’ Among whom there are cousins who
are so poor that one might almost dare to think it would have been
the happier for them never to have been plated links upon the Dedlock
chain of gold, but to have been made of common iron at first and done
base service.

Service, however (with a few limited reservations, genteel but not
profitable), they may not do, being of the Dedlock dignity. So they visit
their richer cousins, and get into debt when they can, and live but
shabbily when they can't, and find--the women no husbands, and the
men no wives--and ride in borrowed carriages, and sit at feasts that
are never of their own making, and so go through high life. The rich
family sum has been divided by so many figures, and they are the
something over that nobody knows what to do with.

Everybody on Sir Leicester Dedlock's side of the question and of his
way of thinking would appear to be his cousin more or less. From my
Lord Boodle, through the Duke of Foodle, down to Noodle, Sir
Leicester, like a glorious spider, stretches his threads of relationship.
But while he is stately in the cousinship of the Everybodys, he is a
kind and generous man, according to his dignified way, in the
cousinship of the Nobodys; and at the present time, in despite of the
damp, he stays out the visit of several such cousins at Chesney Wold
with the constancy of a martyr.
Of these, foremost in the front rank stands Volumnia Dedlock, a
young lady (of sixty) who is doubly highly related, having the honour
to be a poor relation, by the mother's side, to another great family.
Miss Volumnia, displaying in early life a pretty talent for cutting
ornaments out of coloured paper, and also for singing to the guitar in
the Spanish tongue, and propounding French conundrums in country
houses, passed the twenty years of her existence between twenty and
forty in a sufficiently agreeable manner. Lapsing then out of date and
being considered to bore mankind by her vocal performances in the
Spanish language, she retired to Bath, where she lives slenderly on an
annual present from Sir Leicester and whence she makes occasional
resurrections in the country houses of her cousins. She has an
extensive acquaintance at Bath among appalling old gentlemen with
thin legs and nankeen trousers, and is of high standing in that dreary
city. But she is a little dreaded elsewhere in consequence of an
indiscreet profusion in the article of rouge and persistency in an
obsolete pearl necklace like a rosary of little bird's-eggs.

In any country in a wholesome state, Volumnia would be a clear case
for the pension list. Efforts have been made to get her on it, and when
William Buffy came in, it was fully expected that her name would be
put down for a couple of hundred a year. But William Buffy somehow
discovered, contrary to all expectation, that these were not the times
when it could be done, and this was the first clear indication Sir
Leicester Dedlock had conveyed to him that the country was going to
pieces.

There is likewise the Honourable Bob Stables, who can make warm
mashes with the skill of a veterinary surgeon and is a better shot than
most gamekeepers. He has been for some time particularly desirous to
serve his country in a post of good emoluments, unaccompanied by
any trouble or responsibility. In a well- regulated body politic this
natural desire on the part of a spirited young gentleman so highly
connected would be speedily recognized, but somehow William Buffy
found when he came in that these were not times in which he could
manage that little matter either, and this was the second indication
Sir Leicester Dedlock had conveyed to him that the country was going
to pieces.

The rest of the cousins are ladies and gentlemen of various ages and
capacities, the major part amiable and sensible and likely to have
done well enough in life if they could have overcome their cousinship;
as it is, they are almost all a little worsted by it, and lounge in
purposeless and listless paths, and seem to be quite as much at a loss
how to dispose of themselves as anybody else can be how to dispose of
them.
In this society, and where not, my Lady Dedlock reigns supreme.
Beautiful, elegant, accomplished, and powerful in her little world (for
the world of fashion does not stretch ALL the way from pole to pole),
her influence in Sir Leicester's house, however haughty and indifferent
her manner, is greatly to improve it and refine it. The cousins, even
those older cousins who were paralysed when Sir Leicester married
her, do her feudal homage; and the Honourable Bob Stables daily
repeats to some chosen person between breakfast and lunch his
favourite original remark, that she is the best-groomed woman in the
whole stud.

Such the guests in the long drawing-room at Chesney Wold this
dismal night when the step on the Ghost's Walk (inaudible here,
however) might be the step of a deceased cousin shut out in the cold.
It is near bed-time. Bedroom fires blaze brightly all over the house,
raising ghosts of grim furniture on wall and ceiling. Bedroom
candlesticks bristle on the distant table by the door, and cousins
yawn on ottomans. Cousins at the piano, cousins at the soda-water
tray, cousins rising from the card-table, cousins gathered round the
fire. Standing on one side of his own peculiar fire (for there are two),
Sir Leicester. On the opposite side of the broad hearth, my Lady at her
table. Volumnia, as one of the more privileged cousins, in a luxurious
chair between them. Sir Leicester glancing, with magnificent
displeasure, at the rouge and the pearl necklace.

T occasionally meet on my staircase here,’ drawls Volumnia, whose
thoughts perhaps are already hopping up it to bed, after a long
evening of very desultory talk, ‘one of the prettiest girls, I think, that I
ever saw in my life.’

‘A PROTEGEE of my Lady's,’ observes Sir Leicester.

T thought so. I felt sure that some uncommon eye must have picked
that girl out. She really is a marvel. A dolly sort of beauty perhaps,’
says Miss Volumnia, reserving her own sort, ‘but in its way, perfect;

such bloom I never saw!’

Sir Leicester, with his magnificent glance of displeasure at the rouge,
appears to say so too.

‘Indeed,’ remarks my Lady languidly, ‘if there is any uncommon eye in
the case, it is Mrs Rouncewell's, and not mine. Rosa is her discovery.’

‘Your maid, I suppose?’

‘No. My anything; pet--secretary--messenger--I don't know what.’
‘You like to have her about you, as you would like to have a flower, or
a bird, or a picture, or a poodle--no, not a poodle, though--or anything
else that was equally pretty?’ says Volumnia, sympathizing. ‘Yes, how
charming now! And how well that delightful old soul Mrs Rouncewell
is looking. She must be an immense age, and yet she is as active and
handsome! She is the dearest friend I have, positively)’

Sir Leicester feels it to be right and fitting that the housekeeper of
Chesney Wold should be a remarkable person. Apart from that, he has
a real regard for Mrs Rouncewell and likes to hear her praised. So he
says, ‘You are right, Volumnia,’ which Volumnia is extremely glad to
hear.

‘She has no daughter of her own, has she?’
‘Mrs Rouncewell? No, Volumnia. She has a son. Indeed, she had two.’

My Lady, whose chronic malady of boredom has been sadly
aggravated by Volumnia this evening, glances wearily towards the
candlesticks and heaves a noiseless sigh.

‘And it is a remarkable example of the confusion into which the
present age has fallen; of the obliteration of landmarks, the opening of
floodgates, and the uprooting of distinctions,’ says Sir Leicester with
stately gloom, ‘that I have been informed by Mr Tulkinghorn that Mrs
Rouncewell's son has been invited to go into Parliament.’

Miss Volumnia utters a little sharp scream.
‘Yes, indeed,’ repeats Sir Leicester. Into Parliament.’

T never heard of such a thing! Good gracious, what is the man?’
exclaims Volumnia.

‘He is called, I believe--an--ironmaster.’ Sir Leicester says it slowly and
with gravity and doubt, as not being sure but that he is called a lead-
mistress or that the right word may be some other word expressive of
some other relationship to some other metal.

Volumnia utters another little scream.

‘He has declined the proposal, if my information from Mr Tulkinghorn
be correct, as I have no doubt it is. Mr Tulkinghorn being always
correct and exact; still that does not,’ says Sir Leicester, ‘that does not
lessen the anomaly, which is fraught with strange considerations--
startling considerations, as it appears to me.’
Miss Volumnia rising with a look candlestick-wards, Sir Leicester
politely performs the grand tour of the drawing-room, brings one, and
lights it at my Lady's shaded lamp.

T must beg you, my Lady,’ he says while doing so, ‘to remain a few
moments, for this individual of whom I speak arrived this evening
shortly before dinner and requested in a very becoming note’--Sir
Leicester, with his habitual regard to truth, dwells upon it--T am
bound to say, in a very becoming and well-expressed note, the favour
of a short interview with yourself and MYself on the subject of this
young girl. As it appeared that he wished to depart to- night, I replied
that we would see him before retiring.’

Miss Volumnia with a third little scream takes flight, wishing her
hosts--O Lud!--well rid of the--what is it?--ironmaster!

The other cousins soon disperse, to the last cousin there. Sir Leicester
rings the bell, ‘Make my compliments to Mr Rouncewell, in the
housekeeper's apartments, and say I can receive him now.’

My Lady, who has heard all this with slight attention outwardly, looks
towards Mr Rouncewell as he comes in. He is a little over fifty
perhaps, of a good figure, like his mother, and has a clear voice, a
broad forehead from which his dark hair has retired, and a shrewd
though open face. He is a responsible-looking gentleman dressed in
black, portly enough, but strong and active. Has a perfectly natural
and easy air and is not in the least embarrassed by the great presence
into which he comes.

‘Sir Leicester and Lady Dedlock, as I have already apologized for
intruding on you, I cannot do better than be very brief. I thank you,
Sir Leicester.’

The head of the Dedlocks has motioned towards a sofa between
himself and my Lady. Mr Rouncewell quietly takes his seat there.

In these busy times, when so many great undertakings are in
progress, people like myself have so many workmen in so many places
that we are always on the flight.’

Sir Leicester is content enough that the ironmaster should feel that
there is no hurry there; there, in that ancient house, rooted in that
quiet park, where the ivy and the moss have had time to mature, and
the gnarled and warted elms and the umbrageous oaks stand deep in
the fern and leaves of a hundred years; and where the sun-dial on the
terrace has dumbly recorded for centuries that time which was as
much the property of every Dedlock--while he lasted-- as the house
and lands. Sir Leicester sits down in an easy-chair, opposing his
repose and that of Chesney Wold to the restless flights of ironmasters.

‘Lady Dedlock has been so kind,’ proceeds Mr Rouncewell with a
respectful glance and a bow that way, ‘as to place near her a young
beauty of the name of Rosa. Now, my son has fallen in love with Rosa
and has asked my consent to his proposing marriage to her and to
their becoming engaged if she will take him--which I suppose she will.
I have never seen Rosa until to-day, but I have some confidence in my
son's good sense--even in love. I find her what he represents her, to
the best of my judgment; and my mother speaks of her with great
commendation.’

‘She in all respects deserves it,’ says my Lady.

Tam happy, Lady Dedlock, that you say so, and I need not comment
on the value to me of your kind opinion of her.’

‘That,’ observes Sir Leicester with unspeakable grandeur, for he thinks
the ironmaster a little too glib, ‘must be quite unnecessary.’

‘Quite unnecessary, Sir Leicester. Now, my son is a very young man,
and Rosa is a very young woman. As I made my way, so my son must
make his; and his being married at present is out of the question. But
supposing I gave my consent to his engaging himself to this pretty girl,
if this pretty girl will engage herself to him, I think it a piece of
candour to say at once--I am sure, Sir Leicester and Lady Dedlock,
you will understand and excuse me--I should make it a condition that
she did not remain at Chesney Wold. Therefore, before communicating
further with my son, I take the liberty of saying that if her removal
would be in any way inconvenient or objectionable, I will hold the
matter over with him for any reasonable time and leave it precisely
where it is.’

Not remain at Chesney Wold! Make it a condition! All Sir Leicester's
old misgivings relative to Wat Tyler and the people in the iron districts
who do nothing but turn out by torchlight come in a shower upon his
head, the fine grey hair of which, as well as of his whiskers, actually
stirs with indignation.

‘Am I to understand, sir,’ says Sir Leicester, ‘and is my Lady to
understand’--he brings her in thus specially, first as a point of
gallantry, and next as a point of prudence, having great reliance on
her sense--’am I to understand, Mr Rouncewell, and is my Lady to
understand, sir, that you consider this young woman too good for
Chesney Wold or likely to be injured by remaining here?’

‘Certainly not, Sir Leicester,’
T am glad to hear it.’ Sir Leicester very lofty indeed.

‘Pray, Mr Rouncewell,’ says my Lady, warning Sir Leicester off with the
slightest gesture of her pretty hand, as if he were a fly, ‘explain to me
what you mean.’

‘Willingly, Lady Dedlock. There is nothing I could desire more.’

Addressing her composed face, whose intelligence, however, is too
quick and active to be concealed by any studied impassiveness,
however habitual, to the strong Saxon face of the visitor, a picture of
resolution and perseverance, my Lady listens with attention,
occasionally slightly bending her head.

T am the son of your housekeeper, Lady Dedlock, and passed my
childhood about this house. My mother has lived here half a century
and will die here I have no doubt. She is one of those examples--
perhaps as good a one as there is--of love, and attachment, and
fidelity in such a nation, which England may well be proud of, but of
which no order can appropriate the whole pride or the whole merit,
because such an instance bespeaks high worth on two sides--on the
great side assuredly, on the small one no less assuredly.’ Sir Leicester
snorts a little to hear the law laid down in this way, but in his honour
and his love of truth, he freely, though silently, admits the justice of
the ironmaster's proposition.

‘Pardon me for saying what is so obvious, but I wouldn't have it
hastily supposed,’ with the least turn of his eyes towards Sir Leicester,
‘that Iam ashamed of my mother's position here, or wanting in all just
respect for Chesney Wold and the family. I certainly may have desired-
-I certainly have desired, Lady Dedlock --that my mother should retire
after so many years and end her days with me. But as I have found
that to sever this strong bond would be to break her heart, I have long
abandoned that idea.’

Sir Leicester very magnificent again at the notion of Mrs Rouncewell
being spirited off from her natural home to end her days with an
ironmaster.

IT have been,’ proceeds the visitor in a modest, clear way, ‘an
apprentice and a workman. I have lived on workman's wages, years
and years, and beyond a certain point have had to educate myself. My
wife was a foreman's daughter, and plainly brought up. We have three
daughters besides this son of whom I have spoken, and being
fortunately able to give them greater advantages than we have had
ourselves, we have educated them well, very well. It has been one of
our great cares and pleasures to make them worthy of any station.’
A little boastfulness in his fatherly tone here, as if he added in his
heart, ‘even of the Chesney Wold station.’ Not a little more
magnificence, therefore, on the part of Sir Leicester.

‘All this is so frequent, Lady Dedlock, where I live, and among the
class to which I belong, that what would be generally called unequal
marriages are not of such rare occurrence with us as elsewhere. A son
will sometimes make it known to his father that he has fallen in love,
say, with a young woman in the factory. The father, who once worked
in a factory himself, will be a little disappointed at first very possibly.
It may be that he had other views for his son. However, the chances
are that having ascertained the young woman to be of unblemished
character, he will say to his son, 'I must be quite sure you are in
earnest here. This is a serious matter for both of you. Therefore I shall
have this girl educated for two years,' or it may be, 'I shall place this
girl at the same school with your sisters for such a time, during which
you will give me your word and honour to see her only so often. If at
the expiration of that time, when she has so far profited by her
advantages as that you may be upon a fair equality, you are both in
the same mind, I will do my part to make you happy.' I know of
several cases such as I describe, my Lady, and I think they indicate to
me my own course now.’

Sir Leicester's magnificence explodes. Calmly, but terribly.

‘Mr Rouncewell,’ says Sir Leicester with his right hand in the breast of
his blue coat, the attitude of state in which he is painted in the
gallery, ‘do you draw a parallel between Chesney Wold and a--’ Here
he resists a disposition to choke, ‘a factory?’

T need not reply, Sir Leicester, that the two places are very different;
but for the purposes of this case, I think a parallel may be justly
drawn between them.’

Sir Leicester directs his majestic glance down one side of the long
drawing-room and up the other before he can believe that he is awake.

‘Are you aware, sir, that this young woman whom my Lady--my Lady--
has placed near her person was brought up at the village school
outside the gates?’

‘Sir Leicester, I am quite aware of it. A very good school it is, and
handsomely supported by this family.’

Then, Mr Rouncewell,’ returns Sir Leicester, ‘the application of what
you have said is, to me, incomprehensible.’
‘Will it be more comprehensible, Sir Leicester, if I say,’ the ironmaster
is reddening a little, ‘that I do not regard the village school as teaching
everything desirable to be known by my son's wife?’

From the village school of Chesney Wold, intact as it is this minute, to
the whole framework of society; from the whole framework of society,
to the aforesaid framework receiving tremendous cracks in
consequence of people (iron-masters, lead-mistresses, and what not)
not minding their catechism, and getting out of the station unto which
they are called--necessarily and for ever, according to Sir Leicester's
rapid logic, the first station in which they happen to find themselves;
and from that, to their educating other people out of THEIR stations,
and so obliterating the landmarks, and opening the floodgates, and all
the rest of it; this is the swift progress of the Dedlock mind.

‘My Lady, I beg your pardon. Permit me, for one moment!’ She has
given a faint indication of intending to speak. ‘Mr Rouncewell, our
views of duty, and our views of station, and our views of education,
and our views of--in short, ALL our views--are so diametrically
opposed, that to prolong this discussion must be repellent to your
feelings and repellent to my own. This young woman is honoured with
my Lady's notice and favour. If she wishes to withdraw herself from
that notice and favour or if she chooses to place herself under the
influence of any one who may in his peculiar opinions--you will allow
me to say, in his peculiar opinions, though I readily admit that he is
not accountable for them to me--who may, in his peculiar opinions,
withdraw her from that notice and favour, she is at any time at liberty
to do so. We are obliged to you for the plainness with which you have
spoken. It will have no effect of itself, one way or other, on the young
woman's position here. Beyond this, we can make no terms; and here
we beg--if you will be so good--to leave the subject.’

The visitor pauses a moment to give my Lady an opportunity, but she
says nothing. He then rises and replies, ‘Sir Leicester and Lady
Dedlock, allow me to thank you for your attention and only to observe
that I shall very seriously recommend my son to conquer his present
inclinations. Good night!’

‘Mr Rouncewell,’ says Sir Leicester with all the nature of a gentleman
shining in him, ‘it is late, and the roads are dark. I hope your time is
not so precious but that you will allow my Lady and myself to offer
you the hospitality of Chesney Wold, for to- night at least.’

T hope so,’ adds my Lady.
T am much obliged to you, but I have to travel all night in order to

reach a distant part of the country punctually at an appointed time in
the morning.’
Therewith the ironmaster takes his departure, Sir Leicester ringing the
bell and my Lady rising as he leaves the room.

When my Lady goes to her boudoir, she sits down thoughtfully by the
fire, and inattentive to the Ghost's Walk, looks at Rosa, writing in an
inner room. Presently my Lady calls her.

‘Come to me, child. Tell me the truth. Are you in love?’
‘Oh! My Lady!’

My Lady, looking at the downcast and blushing face, says smiling,
‘Who is it? Is it Mrs Rouncewell's grandson?’

‘Yes, if you please, my Lady. But I don't know that I am in love with
him--yet.’

Yet, you silly little thing! Do you know that he loves YOU, yet?’
T think he likes me a little, my Lady.’ And Rosa bursts into tears.

Is this Lady Dedlock standing beside the village beauty, smoothing her
dark hair with that motherly touch, and watching her with eyes so full
of musing interest? Aye, indeed it is!

‘Listen to me, child. You are young and true, and I believe you are
attached to me.’

‘Indeed I am, my Lady. Indeed there is nothing in the world I wouldn't
do to show how much.’

‘And I don't think you would wish to leave me just yet, Rosa, even for
a lover?’

‘No, my Lady! Oh, no!’ Rosa looks up for the first time, quite frightened
at the thought.

‘Confide in me, my child. Don't fear me. I wish you to be happy, and
will make you so--if I can make anybody happy on this earth.’

Rosa, with fresh tears, kneels at her feet and kisses her hand. My
Lady takes the hand with which she has caught it, and standing with
her eyes fixed on the fire, puts it about and about between her own
two hands, and gradually lets it fall. Seeing her so absorbed, Rosa
softly withdraws; but still my Lady's eyes are on the fire.

In search of what? Of any hand that is no more, of any hand that
never was, of any touch that might have magically changed her life?
Or does she listen to the Ghost's Walk and think what step does it
most resemble? A man's? A woman's? The pattering of a little child's
feet, ever coming on--on--on? Some melancholy influence is upon her,
or why should so proud a lady close the doors and sit alone upon the
hearth so desolate?

Volumnia is away next day, and all the cousins are scattered before
dinner. Not a cousin of the batch but is amazed to hear from Sir
Leicester at breakfast-time of the obliteration of landmarks, and
opening of floodgates, and cracking of the framework of society,
manifested through Mrs Rouncewell's son. Not a cousin of the batch
but is really indignant, and connects it with the feebleness of William
Buffy when in office, and really does feel deprived of a stake in the
country--or the pension list--or something--by fraud and wrong. As to
Volumnia, she is handed down the great staircase by Sir Leicester, as
eloquent upon the theme as if there were a general rising in the north
of England to obtain her rouge-pot and pearl necklace. And thus, with
a clatter of maids and valets--for it is one appurtenance of their
cousinship that however difficult they may find it to keep themselves,
they MUST keep maids and valets--the cousins disperse to the four
winds of heaven; and the one wintry wind that blows to-day shakes a
shower from the trees near the deserted house, as if all the cousins
had been changed into leaves.
Chapter XXIX - The Young Man

Chesney Wold is shut up, carpets are rolled into great scrolls in
corners of comfortless rooms, bright damask does penance in brown
holland, carving and gilding puts on mortification, and the Dedlock
ancestors retire from the light of day again. Around and around the
house the leaves fall thick, but never fast, for they come circling down
with a dead lightness that is sombre and slow. Let the gardener sweep
and sweep the turf as he will, and press the leaves into full barrows,
and wheel them off, still they lie ankle- deep. Howls the shrill wind
round Chesney Wold; the sharp rain beats, the windows rattle, and
the chimneys growl. Mists hide in the avenues, veil the points of view,
and move in funeral-wise across the rising grounds. On all the house
there is a cold, blank smell like the smell of a little church, though
something dryer, suggesting that the dead and buried Dedlocks walk
there in the long nights and leave the flavour of their graves behind
them.

But the house in town, which is rarely in the same mind as Chesney
Wold at the same time, seldom rejoicing when it rejoices or mourning
when it mourns, expecting when a Dedlock dies--the house in town
shines out awakened. As warm and bright as so much state may be,
as delicately redolent of pleasant scents that bear no trace of winter as
hothouse flowers can make it, soft and hushed so that the ticking of
the clocks and the crisp burning of the fires alone disturb the stillness
in the rooms, it seems to wrap those chilled bones of Sir Leicester's in
rainbow-coloured wool. And Sir Leicester is glad to repose in dignified
contentment before the great fire in the library, condescendingly
perusing the backs of his books or honouring the fine arts with a
glance of approbation. For he has his pictures, ancient and modern.
Some of the Fancy Ball School in which art occasionally condescends
to become a master, which would be best catalogued like the
miscellaneous articles in a sale. As Three high-backed chairs, a table
and cover, long-necked bottle (containing wine), one flask, one
Spanish female's costume, three-quarter face portrait of Miss Jogg the
model, and a suit of armour containing Don Quixote.’ Or ‘One stone
terrace (cracked), one gondola in distance, one Venetian senator's
dress complete, richly embroidered white satin costume with profile
portrait of Miss Jogg the model, one Scimitar superbly mounted in
gold with jewelled handle, elaborate Moorish dress (very rare), and
Othello.’

Mr Tulkinghorn comes and goes pretty often, there being estate
business to do, leases to be renewed, and so on. He sees my Lady
pretty often, too; and he and she are as composed, and as indifferent,
and take as little heed of one another, as ever. Yet it may be that my
Lady fears this Mr Tulkinghorn and that he knows it. It may be that
he pursues her doggedly and steadily, with no touch of compunction,
remorse, or pity. It may be that her beauty and all the state and
brilliancy surrounding her only gives him the greater zest for what he
is set upon and makes him the more inflexible in it. Whether he be
cold and cruel, whether immovable in what he has made his duty,
whether absorbed in love of power, whether determined to have
nothing hidden from him in ground where he has burrowed among
secrets all his life, whether he in his heart despises the splendour of
which he is a distant beam, whether he is always treasuring up slights
and offences in the affability of his gorgeous clients--whether he be
any of this, or all of this, it may be that my Lady had better have five
thousand pairs of fashionable eyes upon her, in distrustful vigilance,
than the two eyes of this rusty lawyer with his wisp of neckcloth and
his dull black breeches tied with ribbons at the knees.

Sir Leicester sits in my Lady's room--that room in which Mr
Tulkinghorn read the affidavit in Jarndyce and Jarndyce-- particularly
complacent. My Lady, as on that day, sits before the fire with her
screen in her hand. Sir Leicester is particularly complacent because
he has found in his newspaper some congenial remarks bearing
directly on the floodgates and the framework of society. They apply so
happily to the late case that Sir Leicester has come from the library to
my Lady's room expressly to read them aloud. ‘The man who wrote
this article,’ he observes by way of preface, nodding at the fire as if he
were nodding down at the man from a mount, ‘has a well-balanced
mind.’

The man's mind is not so well balanced but that he bores my Lady,
who, after a languid effort to listen, or rather a languid resignation of
herself to a show of listening, becomes distraught and falls into a
contemplation of the fire as if it were her fire at Chesney Wold, and
she had never left it. Sir Leicester, quite unconscious, reads on
through his double eye-glass, occasionally stopping to remove his
glass and express approval, as ‘Very true indeed,’ Very properly put,’
T have frequently made the same remark myself,’ invariably losing his
place after each observation, and going up and down the column to
find it again.

Sir Leicester is reading with infinite gravity and state when the door
opens, and the Mercury in powder makes this strange announcement,
‘The young man, my Lady, of the name of Guppy.’

Sir Leicester pauses, stares, repeats in a killing voice, ‘The young man
of the name of Guppy?’

Looking round, he beholds the young man of the name of Guppy,
much discomfited and not presenting a very impressive letter of
introduction in his manner and appearance.
‘Pray,’ says Sir Leicester to Mercury, ‘what do you mean by
announcing with this abruptness a young man of the name of
Guppy?’

T beg your pardon, Sir Leicester, but my Lady said she would see the
young man whenever he called. I was not aware that you were here,
Sir Leicester.’

With this apology, Mercury directs a scornful and indignant look at
the young man of the name of Guppy which plainly says, ‘What do
you come calling here for and getting ME into a row?’

It's quite right. I gave him those directions,’ says my Lady. ‘Let the
young man wait.’

‘By no means, my Lady. Since he has your orders to come, I will not
interrupt you.’ Sir Leicester in his gallantry retires, rather declining to
accept a bow from the young man as he goes out and majestically
supposing him to be some shoemaker of intrusive appearance.

Lady Dedlock looks imperiously at her visitor when the servant has
left the room, casting her eyes over him from head to foot. She suffers
him to stand by the door and asks him what he wants.

‘That your ladyship would have the kindness to oblige me with a little
conversation,’ returns Mr Guppy, embarrassed.

‘You are, of course, the person who has written me so many letters?’

‘Several, your ladyship. Several before your ladyship condescended to
favour me with an answer.’

‘And could you not take the same means of rendering a Conversation
unnecessary? Can you not still?’

Mr Guppy screws his mouth into a silent ‘No!’ and shakes his head.

‘You have been strangely importunate. If it should appear, after all,
that what you have to say does not concern me--and I don't know how
it can, and don't expect that it will--you will allow me to cut you short
with but little ceremony. Say what you have to say, if you please.’

My Lady, with a careless toss of her screen, turns herself towards the
fire again, sitting almost with her back to the young man of the name
of Guppy.

‘With your ladyship's permission, then,’ says the young man, 1 will
now enter on my business. Hem! I am, as I told your ladyship in my
first letter, in the law. Being in the law, I have learnt the habit of not
committing myself in writing, and therefore I did not mention to your
ladyship the name of the firm with which I am connected and in which
my standing--and I may add income--is tolerably good. I may now
state to your ladyship, in confidence, that the name of that firm is
Kenge and Carboy, of Lincoln's Inn, which may not be altogether
unknown to your ladyship in connexion with the case in Chancery of
Jarndyce and Jarndyce.’

My Lady's figure begins to be expressive of some attention. She has
ceased to toss the screen and holds it as if she were listening.

‘Now, I may say to your ladyship at once,’ says Mr Guppy, a little
emboldened, ‘it is no matter arising out of Jarndyce and Jarndyce that
made me so desirous to speak to your ladyship, which conduct I have
no doubt did appear, and does appear, obtrusive--in fact, almost
blackguardly.’

After waiting for a moment to receive some assurance to the contrary,
and not receiving any, Mr Guppy proceeds, ‘Tf it had been Jarndyce
and Jarndyce, I should have gone at once to your ladyship's solicitor,
Mr Tulkinghorn, of the Fields. I have the pleasure of being acquainted
with Mr Tulkinghorn--at least we move when we meet one another--
and if it had been any business of that sort, I should have gone to
him.’

My Lady turns a little round and says, ‘You had better sit down.’

‘Thank your ladyship.’ Mr Guppy does so. ‘Now, your ladyship’-- Mr
Guppy refers to a little slip of paper on which he has made small
notes of his line of argument and which seems to involve him in the
densest obscurity whenever he looks at it--’I--Oh, yes!--I place myself
entirely in your ladyship's hands. If your ladyship was to make any
complaint to Kenge and Carboy or to Mr Tulkinghorn of the present
visit, I should be placed in a very disagreeable situation. That, I openly
admit. Consequently, I rely upon your ladyship's honour.’

My Lady, with a disdainful gesture of the hand that holds the screen,
assures him of his being worth no complaint from her.

‘Thank your ladyship,’ says Mr Guppy; ‘quite satisfactory. Now-- I--
dash it!--The fact is that I put down a head or two here of the order of
the points I thought of touching upon, and they're written short, and I
can't quite make out what they mean. If your ladyship will excuse me
taking it to the window half a moment, I--’

Mr Guppy, going to the window, tumbles into a pair of love-birds, to
whom he says in his confusion, ‘I beg your pardon, I am sure.’ This
does not tend to the greater legibility of his notes. He murmurs,
growing warm and red and holding the slip of paper now close to his
eyes, now a long way off, ‘C.S. What's C.S. for? Oh! C.S.! Oh, I know!
Yes, to be sure!’ And comes back enlightened.

T am not aware,’ says Mr Guppy, standing midway between my Lady
and his chair, ‘whether your ladyship ever happened to hear of, or to
see, a young lady of the name of Miss Esther Summerson.’

My Lady's eyes look at him full. I saw a young lady of that name not
long ago. This past autumn.’

‘Now, did it strike your ladyship that she was like anybody?’ asks Mr
Guppy, crossing his arms, holding his head on one side, and
scratching the corner of his mouth with his memoranda.

My Lady removes her eyes from him no more.
‘No.’

‘Not like your ladyship's family?’

‘No.’

T think your ladyship,’ says Mr Guppy, ‘can hardly remember Miss
Summerson's face?’

‘T remember the young lady very well. What has this to do with me?’

‘Your ladyship, I do assure you that having Miss Summerson's image
imprinted on my 'eart--which I mention in confidence--I found, when I
had the honour of going over your ladyship's mansion of Chesney
Wold while on a short out in the county of Lincolnshire with a friend,
such a resemblance between Miss Esther Summerson and your
ladyship's own portrait that it completely knocked me over, so much
so that I didn't at the moment even know what it WAS that knocked
me over. And now I have the honour of beholding your ladyship near (I
have often, since that, taken the liberty of looking at your ladyship in
your carriage in the park, when I dare say you was not aware of me,
but I never saw your ladyship so near), it's really more surprising than
I thought it.’

Young man of the name of Guppy! There have been times, when ladies
lived in strongholds and had unscrupulous attendants within call,
when that poor life of yours would NOT have been worth a minute's
purchase, with those beautiful eyes looking at you as they look at this
moment.
My Lady, slowly using her little hand-screen as a fan, asks him again
what he supposes that his taste for likenesses has to do with her.

‘Your ladyship,’ replies Mr Guppy, again referring to his paper, ‘I am
coming to that. Dash these notes! Oh! 'Mrs Chadband.' Yes.’ Mr
Guppy draws his chair a little forward and seats himself again. My
Lady reclines in her chair composedly, though with a trifle less of
graceful ease than usual perhaps, and never falters in her steady
gaze. ‘A--stop a minute, though!’ Mr Guppy refers again. ‘E.S. twice?
Oh, yes! Yes, I see my way now, right on.’

Rolling up the slip of paper as an instrument to point his speech with,
Mr Guppy proceeds.

‘Your ladyship, there is a mystery about Miss Esther Summerson's
birth and bringing up. I am informed of that fact because--which I
mention in confidence--I know it in the way of my profession at Kenge
and Carboy's. Now, as I have already mentioned to your ladyship,
Miss Summerson's image is imprinted on my 'eart. If I could clear this
mystery for her, or prove her to be well related, or find that having the
honour to be a remote branch of your ladyship's family she had a
right to be made a party in Jarndyce and Jarndyce, why, I might make
a sort of a claim upon Miss Summerson to look with an eye of more
dedicated favour on my proposals than she has exactly done as yet. In
fact, as yet she hasn't favoured them at all.’

A kind of angry smile just dawns upon my Lady's face.

‘Now, it's a very singular circumstance, your ladyship,’ says Mr
Guppy, ‘though one of those circumstances that do fall in the way of
us professional men--which I may call myself, for though not
admitted, yet I have had a present of my articles made to me by Kenge
and Carboy, on my mother's advancing from the principal of her little
income the money for the stamp, which comes heavy--that I have
encountered the person who lived as servant with the lady who
brought Miss Summerson up before Mr Jarndyce took charge of her.
That lady was a Miss Barbary, your ladyship.’

Is the dead colour on my Lady's face reflected from the screen which
has a green silk ground and which she holds in her raised hand as if
she had forgotten it, or is it a dreadful paleness that has fallen on
her?

‘Did your ladyship,’ says Mr Guppy, ‘ever happen to hear of Miss
Barbary?’

J don't know. I think so. Yes.’
‘Was Miss Barbary at all connected with your ladyship's family?’
My Lady's lips move, but they utter nothing. She shakes her head.

‘NOT connected?’ says Mr Guppy. ‘Oh! Not to your ladyship's
knowledge, perhaps? Ah! But might be? Yes.’ After each of these
interrogatories, she has inclined her head. ‘Very good! Now, this Miss
Barbary was extremely close--seems to have been extraordinarily close
for a female, females being generally (in common life at least) rather
given to conversation--and my witness never had an idea whether she
possessed a single relative. On one occasion, and only one, she seems
to have been confidential to my witness on a single point, and she
then told her that the little girl's real name was not Esther
Summerson, but Esther Hawdon.’

‘My God!’

Mr Guppy stares. Lady Dedlock sits before him looking him through,
with the same dark shade upon her face, in the same attitude even to
the holding of the screen, with her lips a little apart, her brow a little
contracted, but for the moment dead. He sees her consciousness
return, sees a tremor pass across her frame like a ripple over water,
sees her lips shake, sees her compose them by a great effort, sees her
force herself back to the knowledge of his presence and of what he has
said. All this, so quickly, that her exclamation and her dead condition
seem to have passed away like the features of those long-preserved
dead bodies sometimes opened up in tombs, which, struck by the air
like lightning, vanish in a breath.

‘Your ladyship is acquainted with the name of Hawdon?’

T have heard it before.’

‘Name of any collateral or remote branch of your ladyship's family?’
‘No.’

‘Now, your ladyship,’ says Mr Guppy, ‘I come to the last point of the
case, so far as I have got it up. It's going on, and I shall gather it up
closer and closer as it goes on. Your ladyship must know--if your
ladyship don't happen, by any chance, to know already--that there
was found dead at the house of a person named Krook, near Chancery
Lane, some time ago, a law-writer in great distress. Upon which law-
writer there was an inquest, and which law-writer was an anonymous
character, his name being unknown. But, your ladyship, I have
discovered very lately that that law- writer's name was Hawdon.’

‘And what is THAT to me?’
‘Aye, your ladyship, that's the question! Now, your ladyship, a queer
thing happened after that man's death. A lady started up, a disguised
lady, your ladyship, who went to look at the scene of action and went
to look at his grave. She hired a crossing- sweeping boy to show it her.
If your ladyship would wish to have the boy produced in corroboration
of this statement, I can lay my hand upon him at any time.’

The wretched boy is nothing to my Lady, and she does NOT wish to
have him produced.

‘Oh, I assure your ladyship it's a very queer start indeed,’ says Mr
Guppy. ‘If you was to hear him tell about the rings that sparkled on
her fingers when she took her glove off, you'd think it quite romantic.’

There are diamonds glittering on the hand that holds the screen. My
Lady trifles with the screen and makes them glitter more, again with
that expression which in other times might have been so dangerous to
the young man of the name of Guppy.

It was supposed, your ladyship, that he left no rag or scrap behind
him by which he could be possibly identified. But he did. He left a
bundle of old letters.’

The screen still goes, as before. All this time her eyes never once
release him.

‘They were taken and secreted. And to-morrow night, your ladyship,
they will come into my possession.’

‘Still I ask you, what is this to me?’

‘Your ladyship, I conclude with that.’ Mr Guppy rises. Tf you think
there's enough in this chain of circumstances put together-- in the
undoubted strong likeness of this young lady to your ladyship, which
is a positive fact for a jury; in her having been brought up by Miss
Barbary; in Miss Barbary stating Miss Summerson's real name to be
Hawdon; in your ladyship's knowing both these names VERY WELL;
and in Hawdon's dying as he did--to give your ladyship a family
interest in going further into the case, I will bring these papers here. I
don't know what they are, except that they are old letters: I have never
had them in my possession yet. I will bring those papers here as soon
as I get them and go over them for the first time with your ladyship. I
have told your ladyship my object. I have told your ladyship that I
should be placed in a very disagreeable situation if any complaint was
made, and all is in strict confidence.’

Is this the full purpose of the young man of the name of Guppy, or has
he any other? Do his words disclose the length, breadth, depth, of his
object and suspicion in coming here; or if not, what do they hide? He
is a match for my Lady there. She may look at him, but he can look at
the table and keep that witness-box face of his from telling anything.

‘You may bring the letters,’ says my Lady, ‘if you choose.’

‘Your ladyship is not very encouraging, upon my word and honour,’
says Mr Guppy, a little injured. ‘You may bring the letters,’ she
repeats in the same tone, ‘if you --please.’

Tt shall be done. I wish your ladyship good day.’

On a table near her is a rich bauble of a casket, barred and clasped
like an old strong-chest. She, looking at him still, takes it to her and
unlocks it.

‘Oh! I assure your ladyship I am not actuated by any motives of that
sort,’ says Mr Guppy, ‘and I couldn't accept anything of the kind. I
wish your ladyship good day, and am much obliged to you all the
same.’

So the young man makes his bow and goes downstairs, where the
supercilious Mercury does not consider himself called upon to leave
his Olympus by the hall-fire to let the young man out.

As Sir Leicester basks in his library and dozes over his newspaper, is
there no influence in the house to startle him, not to say to make the
very trees at Chesney Wold fling up their knotted arms, the very
portraits frown, the very armour stir?

No. Words, sobs, and cries are but air, and air is so shut in and shut
out throughout the house in town that sounds need be uttered
trumpet-tongued indeed by my Lady in her chamber to carry any faint
vibration to Sir Leicester's ears; and yet this cry is in the house, going
upward from a wild figure on its knees.

‘O my child, my child! Not dead in the first hours of her life, as my
cruel sister told me, but sternly nurtured by her, after she had
renounced me and my name! O my child, O my child!’
Chapter XXX - Esther's Narrative

Richard had been gone away some time when a visitor came to pass a
few days with us. It was an elderly lady. It was Mrs Woodcourt, who,
having come from Wales to stay with Mrs Bayham Badger and having
written to my guardian, ‘by her son Allan's desire,’ to report that she
had heard from him and that he was well ‘and sent his kind
remembrances to all of us,’ had been invited by my guardian to make
a visit to Bleak House. She stayed with us nearly three weeks. She
took very kindly to me and was extremely confidential, so much so
that sometimes she almost made me uncomfortable. I had no right, I
knew very well, to be uncomfortable because she confided in me, and I
felt it was unreasonable; still, with all I could do, I could not quite
help it.

She was such a sharp little lady and used to sit with her hands folded
in each other looking so very watchful while she talked to me that
perhaps I found that rather irksome. Or perhaps it was her being so
upright and trim, though I don't think it was that, because I thought
that quaintly pleasant. Nor can it have been the general expression of
her face, which was very sparkling and pretty for an old lady. I don't
know what it was. Or at least if I do now, I thought I did not then. Or
at least--but it don't matter.

Of a night when I was going upstairs to bed, she would invite me into
her room, where she sat before the fire in a great chair; and, dear me,
she would tell me about Morgan ap-Kerrig until I was quite low-
spirited! Sometimes she recited a few verses from Crumlinwallinwer
and the Mewlinnwillinwodd (if those are the right names, which I dare
say they are not), and would become quite fiery with the sentiments
they expressed. Though I never knew what they were (being in Welsh),
further than that they were highly eulogistic of the lineage of Morgan
ap-Kerrig.

‘So, Miss Summerson,’ she would say to me with stately triumph,
‘this, you see, is the fortune inherited by my son. Wherever my son
goes, he can claim kindred with Ap-Kerrig. He may not have money,
but he always has what is much better--family, my dear.’

I had my doubts of their caring so very much for Morgan ap-Kerrig in
India and China, but of course I never expressed them. I used to say it
was a great thing to be so highly connected.

Tt IS, my dear, a great thing,’ Mrs Woodcourt would reply. ‘It has its
disadvantages; my son's choice of a wife, for instance, is limited by it,
but the matrimonial choice of the royal family is limited in much the
same manner.’
Then she would pat me on the arm and smooth my dress, as much as
to assure me that she had a good opinion of me, the distance between
us notwithstanding.

‘Poor Mr Woodcourt, my dear,’ she would say, and always with some
emotion, for with her lofty pedigree she had a very affectionate heart,
‘was descended from a great Highland family, the MacCoorts of
MacCoort. He served his king and country as an officer in the Royal
Highlanders, and he died on the field. My son is one of the last
representatives of two old families. With the blessing of heaven he will
set them up again and unite them with another old family.’

It was in vain for me to try to change the subject, as I used to try, only
for the sake of novelty or perhaps because--but I need not be so
particular. Mrs Woodcourt never would let me change it.

‘My dear,’ she said one night, ‘you have so much sense and you look
at the world in a quiet manner so superior to your time of life that it is
a comfort to me to talk to you about these family matters of mine. You
don't know much of my son, my dear; but you know enough of him, I
dare say, to recollect him?’

Yes, ma'am. I recollect him.’

‘Yes, my dear. Now, my dear, I think you are a judge of character, and
I should like to have your opinion of him.’

‘Oh, Mrs Woodcourt,’ said I, ‘that is so difficult!’

‘Why is it so difficult, my dear?’ she returned. T don't see it myself.’

‘To give an opinion--’

‘On so slight an acquaintance, my dear. THAT'S true.’

I didn't mean that, because Mr Woodcourt had been at our house a
good deal altogether and had become quite intimate with my
guardian. I said so, and added that he seemed to be very clever in his
profession--we thought--and that his kindness and gentleness to Miss
Flite were above all praise.

‘YYou do him justice!’ said Mrs Woodcourt, pressing my hand. ‘You
define him exactly. Allan is a dear fellow, and in his profession
faultless. I say it, though I am his mother. Still, I must confess he is

not without faults, love.’

‘None of us are,’ said I.
‘Ah! But his really are faults that he might correct, and ought to
correct,’ returned the sharp old lady, sharply shaking her head. I am
so much attached to you that I may confide in you, my dear, as a
third party wholly disinterested, that he is fickleness itself.’

I said I should have thought it hardly possible that he could have been
otherwise than constant to his profession and zealous in the pursuit
of it, judging from the reputation he had earned.

‘YYou are right again, my dear,’ the old lady retorted, ‘but I don't refer
to his profession, look you.’

‘Oh!’ said I.

‘No,’ said she. T refer, my dear, to his social conduct. He is always
paying trivial attentions to young ladies, and always has been, ever
since he was eighteen. Now, my dear, he has never really cared for any
one of them and has never meant in doing this to do any harm or to
express anything but politeness and good nature. Still, it's not right,
you know; is it?’

‘No,’ said I, as she seemed to wait for me.
‘And it might lead to mistaken notions, you see, my dear.’
I supposed it might.

‘Therefore, I have told him many times that he really should be more
careful, both in justice to himself and in justice to others. And he has
always said, 'Mother, I will be; but you know me better than anybody
else does, and you know I mean no harm--in short, mean nothing.' All
of which is very true, my dear, but is no justification. However, as he
is now gone so far away and for an indefinite time, and as he will have
good opportunities and introductions, we may consider this past and
gone. And you, my dear,’ said the old lady, who was now all nods and
smiles, ‘regarding your dear self, my love?’

‘Me, Mrs Woodcourt?’

‘Not to be always selfish, talking of my son, who has gone to seek his
fortune and to find a wife--when do you mean to seek YOUR fortune
and to find a husband, Miss Summerson? Hey, look you! Now you
blush!’

I don't think I did blush--at all events, it was not important if I did--
and I said my present fortune perfectly contented me and I had no
wish to change it.
‘Shall I tell you what I always think of you and the fortune yet to come
for you, my love?’ said Mrs Woodcourt.

Tf you believe you are a good prophet,’ said I.

‘Why, then, it is that you will marry some one very rich and very
worthy, much older--five and twenty years, perhaps--than yourself.
And you will be an excellent wife, and much beloved, and very happy.’

‘That is a good fortune,’ said I. ‘But why is it to be mine?’

‘My dear,’ she returned, ‘there's suitability in it--you are so busy, and
so neat, and so peculiarly situated altogether that there's suitability in
it, and it will come to pass. And nobody, my love, will congratulate you
more sincerely on such a marriage than I shall.’

It was curious that this should make me uncomfortable, but I think it
did. I know it did. It made me for some part of that night
uncomfortable. I was so ashamed of my folly that I did not like to
confess it even to Ada, and that made me more uncomfortable still. I
would have given anything not to have been so much in the bright old
lady's confidence if I could have possibly declined it. It gave me the
most inconsistent opinions of her. At one time I thought she was a
story-teller, and at another time that she was the pink of truth. Now I
suspected that she was very cunning, next moment I believed her
honest Welsh heart to be perfectly innocent and simple. And after all,
what did it matter to me, and why did it matter to me? Why could not
I, going up to bed with my basket of keys, stop to sit down by her fire
and accommodate myself for a little while to her, at least as well as to
anybody else, and not trouble myself about the harmless things she
said to me? Impelled towards her, as I certainly was, for I was very
anxious that she should like me and was very glad indeed that she
did, why should I harp afterwards, with actual distress and pain, on
every word she said and weigh it over and over again in twenty scales?
Why was it so worrying to me to have her in our house, and
confidential to me every night, when I yet felt that it was better and
safer somehow that she should be there than anywhere else? These
were perplexities and contradictions that I could not account for. At
least, if I could--but I shall come to all that by and by, and it is mere
idleness to go on about it now.

So when Mrs Woodcourt went away, I was sorry to lose her but was
relieved too. And then Caddy Jellyby came down, and Caddy brought
such a packet of domestic news that it gave us abundant occupation.

First Caddy declared (and would at first declare nothing else) that I
was the best adviser that ever was known. This, my pet said, was no
news at all; and this, I said, of course, was nonsense. Then Caddy told
us that she was going to be married in a month and that if Ada and I
would be her bridesmaids, she was the happiest girl in the world. To
be sure, this was news indeed; and I thought we never should have
done talking about it, we had so much to say to Caddy, and Caddy
had so much to say to us.

It seemed that Caddy's unfortunate papa had got over his bankruptcy-
~gone through the Gazette,’ was the expression Caddy used, as if it
were a tunnel--with the general clemency and commiseration of his
creditors, and had got rid of his affairs in some blessed manner
without succeeding in understanding them, and had given up
everything he possessed (which was not worth much, I should think,
to judge from the state of the furniture), and had satisfied every one
concerned that he could do no more, poor man. So, he had been
honourably dismissed to ‘the office’ to begin the world again. What he
did at the office, I never knew; Caddy said he was a ‘custom-house
and general agent,’ and the only thing I ever understood about that
business was that when he wanted money more than usual he went to
the docks to look for it, and hardly ever found it.

As soon as her papa had tranquillized his mind by becoming this
shorn lamb, and they had removed to a furnished lodging in Hatton
Garden (where I found the children, when I afterwards went there,
cutting the horse hair out of the seats of the chairs and choking
themselves with it), Caddy had brought about a meeting between him
and old Mr Turveydrop; and poor Mr Jellyby, being very humble and
meek, had deferred to Mr Turveydrop's deportment so submissively
that they had become excellent friends. By degrees, old Mr
Turveydrop, thus familiarized with the idea of his son's marriage, had
worked up his parental feelings to the height of contemplating that
event as being near at hand and had given his gracious consent to the
young couple commencing housekeeping at the academy in Newman
Street when they would.

‘And your papa, Caddy. What did he say?’

‘Oh! Poor Pa,’ said Caddy, ‘only cried and said he hoped we might get
on better than he and Ma had got on. He didn't say so before Prince,
he only said so to me. And he said, 'My poor girl, you have not been
very well taught how to make a home for your husband, but unless
you mean with all your heart to strive to do it, you had better murder
him than marry him--if you really love him."

‘And how did you reassure him, Caddy?’
‘Why, it was very distressing, you know, to see poor Pa so low and

hear him say such terrible things, and I couldn't help crying myself.
But I told him that I DID mean it with all my heart and that I hoped
our house would be a place for him to come and find some comfort in
of an evening and that I hoped and thought I could be a better
daughter to him there than at home. Then I mentioned Peepy's coming
to stay with me, and then Pa began to cry again and said the children
were Indians.’

Indians, Caddy?’

Yes,’ said Caddy, ‘wild Indians. And Pa said’--here she began to sob,
poor girl, not at all like the happiest girl in the world-- ‘that he was
sensible the best thing that could happen to them was their being all
tomahawked together.’

Ada suggested that it was comfortable to know that Mr Jellyby did not
mean these destructive sentiments.

‘No, of course I know Pa wouldn't like his family to be weltering in
their blood,’ said Caddy, ‘but he means that they are very unfortunate
in being Ma's children and that he is very unfortunate in being Ma's
husband; and I am sure that's true, though it seems unnatural to say

?

SO.
I asked Caddy if Mrs Jellyby knew that her wedding-day was fixed.

‘Oh! You know what Ma is, Esther,’ she returned. ‘t's impossible to
say whether she knows it or not. She has been told it often enough;
and when she IS told it, she only gives me a placid look, as if I was I
don't know what--a steeple in the distance,’ said Caddy with a sudden
idea; ‘and then she shakes her head and says 'Oh, Caddy, Caddy,
what a tease you are!' and goes on with the Borrioboola letters.’

‘And about your wardrobe, Caddy?’ said I. For she was under no
restraint with us.

‘Well, my dear Esther,’ she returned, drying her eyes, I must do the
best I can and trust to my dear Prince never to have an unkind
remembrance of my coming so shabbily to him. If the question
concerned an outfit for Borrioboola, Ma would know all about it and
would be quite excited. Being what it is, she neither knows nor cares.’

Caddy was not at all deficient in natural affection for her mother, but
mentioned this with tears as an undeniable fact, which I am afraid it
was. We were sorry for the poor dear girl and found so much to
admire in the good disposition which had survived under such
discouragement that we both at once (I mean Ada and I) proposed a
little scheme that made her perfectly joyful. This was her staying with
us for three weeks, my staying with her for one, and our all three
contriving and cutting out, and repairing, and sewing, and saving, and
doing the very best we could think of to make the most of her stock.
My guardian being as pleased with the idea as Caddy was, we took her
home next day to arrange the matter and brought her out again in
triumph with her boxes and all the purchases that could be squeezed
out of a ten-pound note, which Mr Jellyby had found in the docks I
suppose, but which he at all events gave her. What my guardian
would not have given her if we had encouraged him, it would be
difficult to say, but we thought it right to compound for no more than
her wedding-dress and bonnet. He agreed to this compromise, and if
Caddy had ever been happy in her life, she was happy when we sat
down to work.

She was clumsy enough with her needle, poor girl, and pricked her
fingers as much as she had been used to ink them. She could not help
reddening a little now and then, partly with the smart and partly with
vexation at being able to do no better, but she soon got over that and
began to improve rapidly. So day after day she, and my darling, and
my little maid Charley, and a milliner out of the town, and I, sat hard
at work, as pleasantly as possible.

Over and above this, Caddy was very anxious ‘to learn housekeeping,’
as she said. Now, mercy upon us! The idea of her learning
housekeeping of a person of my vast experience was such a joke that I
laughed, and coloured up, and fell into a comical confusion when she
proposed it. However, I said, ‘Caddy, I am sure you are very welcome
to learn anything that you can learn of ME, my dear,’ and I showed
her all my books and methods and all my fidgety ways. You would
have supposed that I was showing her some wonderful inventions, by
her study of them; and if you had seen her, whenever I jingled my
housekeeping keys, get up and attend me, certainly you might have
thought that there never was a greater imposter than I with a blinder
follower than Caddy Jellyby.

So what with working and housekeeping, and lessons to Charley, and
backgammon in the evening with my guardian, and duets with Ada,
the three weeks slipped fast away. Then I went home with Caddy to
see what could be done there, and Ada and Charley remained behind
to take care of my guardian.

When I say I went home with Caddy, I mean to the furnished lodging
in Hatton Garden. We went to Newman Street two or three times,
where preparations were in progress too--a good many, I observed, for
enhancing the comforts of old Mr Turveydrop, and a few for putting
the newly married couple away cheaply at the top of the house--but
our great point was to make the furnished lodging decent for the
wedding-breakfast and to imbue Mrs Jellyby beforehand with some
faint sense of the occasion.
The latter was the more difficult thing of the two because Mrs Jellyby
and an unwholesome boy occupied the front sitting-room (the back
one was a mere closet), and it was littered down with waste- paper
and Borrioboolan documents, as an untidy stable might be littered
with straw. Mrs Jellyby sat there all day drinking strong coffee,
dictating, and holding Borrioboolan interviews by appointment. The
unwholesome boy, who seemed to me to be going into a decline, took
his meals out of the house. When Mr Jellyby came home, he usually
groaned and went down into the kitchen. There he got something to
eat if the servant would give him anything, and then, feeling that he
was in the way, went out and walked about Hatton Garden in the wet.
The poor children scrambled up and tumbled down the house as they
had always been accustomed to do.

The production of these devoted little sacrifices in any presentable
condition being quite out of the question at a week's notice, I proposed
to Caddy that we should make them as happy as we could on her
marriage morning in the attic where they all slept, and should confine
our greatest efforts to her mama and her mama's room, and a clean
breakfast. In truth Mrs Jellyby required a good deal of attention, the
lattice-work up her back having widened considerably since I first
knew her and her hair looking like the mane of a dustman's horse.

Thinking that the display of Caddy's wardrobe would be the best
means of approaching the subject, I invited Mrs Jellyby to come and
look at it spread out on Caddy's bed in the evening after the
unwholesome boy was gone.

‘My dear Miss Summerson,’ said she, rising from her desk with her
usual sweetness of temper, ‘these are really ridiculous preparations,
though your assisting them is a proof of your kindness. There is
something so inexpressibly absurd to me in the idea of Caddy being
married! Oh, Caddy, you silly, silly, silly puss!’

She came upstairs with us notwithstanding and looked at the clothes
in her customary far-off manner. They suggested one distinct idea to
her, for she said with her placid smile, and shaking her head, ‘My
good Miss Summerson, at half the cost, this weak child might have
been equipped for Africa!’

On our going downstairs again, Mrs Jellyby asked me whether this
troublesome business was really to take place next Wednesday. And
on my replying yes, she said, ‘Will my room be required, my dear Miss
Summerson? For it's quite impossible that I can put my papers away.’

I took the liberty of saying that the room would certainly be wanted
and that I thought we must put the papers away somewhere. ‘Well,
my dear Miss Summerson,’ said Mrs Jellyby, ‘you know best, I dare
say. But by obliging me to employ a boy, Caddy has embarrassed me
to that extent, overwhelmed as I am with public business, that I don't
know which way to turn. We have a Ramification meeting, too, on
Wednesday afternoon, and the inconvenience is very serious.’

Tt is not likely to occur again,’ said I, smiling. ‘Caddy will be married
but once, probably.’

‘That's true,’ Mrs Jellyby replied; ‘that's true, my dear. I suppose we
must make the best of it!’

The next question was how Mrs Jellyby should be dressed on the
occasion. I thought it very curious to see her looking on serenely from
her writing-table while Caddy and I discussed it, occasionally shaking
her head at us with a half-reproachful smile like a superior spirit who
could just bear with our trifling.

The state in which her dresses were, and the extraordinary confusion
in which she kept them, added not a little to our difficulty; but at
length we devised something not very unlike what a common-place
mother might wear on such an occasion. The abstracted manner in
which Mrs Jellyby would deliver herself up to having this attire tried
on by the dressmaker, and the sweetness with which she would then
observe to me how sorry she was that I had not turned my thoughts to
Africa, were consistent with the rest of her behaviour.

The lodging was rather confined as to space, but I fancied that if Mrs
Jellyby's household had been the only lodgers in Saint Paul's or Saint
Peter's, the sole advantage they would have found in the size of the
building would have been its affording a great deal of room to be dirty
in. I believe that nothing belonging to the family which it had been
possible to break was unbroken at the time of those preparations for
Caddy's marriage, that nothing which it had been possible to spoil in
any way was unspoilt, and that no domestic object which was capable
of collecting dirt, from a dear child's knee to the door-plate, was
without as much dirt as could well accumulate upon it.

Poor Mr Jellyby, who very seldom spoke and almost always sat when
he was at home with his head against the wall, became interested
when he saw that Caddy and I were attempting to establish some
order among all this waste and ruin and took off his coat to help. But
such wonderful things came tumbling out of the closets when they
were opened--bits of mouldy pie, sour bottles, Mrs Jellyby's caps,
letters, tea, forks, odd boots and shoes of children, firewood, wafers,
saucepan-lids, damp sugar in odds and ends of paper bags, footstools,
blacklead brushes, bread, Mrs Jellyby's bonnets, books with butter
sticking to the binding, guttered candle ends put out by being turned
upside down in broken candlesticks, nutshells, heads and tails of
shrimps, dinner-mats, gloves, coffee- grounds, umbrellas--that he
looked frightened, and left off again. But he came regularly every
evening and sat without his coat, with his head against the wall, as
though he would have helped us if he had known how.

‘Poor Pa!’ said Caddy to me on the night before the great day, when we
really had got things a little to rights. ‘It seems unkind to leave him,
Esther. But what could I do if I stayed! Since I first knew you, I have
tidied and tidied over and over again, but it's useless. Ma and Africa,
together, upset the whole house directly. We never have a servant who
don't drink. Ma's ruinous to everything.’

Mr Jellyby could not hear what she said, but he seemed very low
indeed and shed tears, I thought.

‘My heart aches for him; that it does!’ sobbed Caddy. I can't help
thinking to-night, Esther, how dearly I hope to be happy with Prince,
and how dearly Pa hoped, I dare say, to be happy with Ma. What a
disappointed life!’

‘My dear Caddy!’ said Mr Jellyby, looking slowly round from the wail.
It was the first time, I think, I ever heard him say three words
together.

‘Yes, Pa!’ cried Caddy, going to him and embracing him affectionately.
‘My dear Caddy,’ said Mr Jellyby. ‘Never have--’

‘Not Prince, Pa?’ faltered Caddy. ‘Not have Prince?’

‘Yes, my dear,’ said Mr Jellyby. ‘Have him, certainly. But, never have--’

I mentioned in my account of our first visit in Thavies Inn that
Richard described Mr Jellyby as frequently opening his mouth after
dinner without saying anything. It was a habit of his. He opened his
mouth now a great many times and shook his head in a melancholy
manner.

‘What do you wish me not to have? Don't have what, dear Pa?’ asked
Caddy, coaxing him, with her arms round his neck.

Never have a mission, my dear child.’
,» my

Mr Jellyby groaned and laid his head against the wall again, and this
was the only time I ever heard him make any approach to expressing
his sentiments on the Borrioboolan question. I suppose he had been
more talkative and lively once, but he seemed to have been completely
exhausted long before I knew him.
I thought Mrs Jellyby never would have left off serenely looking over
her papers and drinking coffee that night. It was twelve o'clock before
we could obtain possession of the room, and the clearance it required
then was so discouraging that Caddy, who was almost tired out, sat
down in the middle of the dust and cried. But she soon cheered up,
and we did wonders with it before we went to bed.

In the morning it looked, by the aid of a few flowers and a quantity of
soap and water and a little arrangement, quite gay. The plain
breakfast made a cheerful show, and Caddy was perfectly charming.
But when my darling came, I thought--and I think now-- that I never
had seen such a dear face as my beautiful pet's.

We made a little feast for the children upstairs, and we put Peepy at
the head of the table, and we showed them Caddy in her bridal dress,
and they clapped their hands and hurrahed, and Caddy cried to think
that she was going away from them and hugged them over and over
again until we brought Prince up to fetch her away--when, I am sorry
to say, Peepy bit him. Then there was old Mr Turveydrop downstairs,
in a state of deportment not to be expressed, benignly blessing Caddy
and giving my guardian to understand that his son's happiness was
his own parental work and that he sacrificed personal considerations
to ensure it. ‘My dear sir,’ said Mr Turveydrop, ‘these young people
will live with me; my house is large enough for their accommodation,
and they shall not want the shelter of my roof. I could have wished--
you will understand the allusion, Mr Jarndyce, for you remember my
illustrious patron the Prince Regent --I could have wished that my son
had married into a family where there was more deportment, but the
will of heaven be done!’

Mr and Mrs Pardiggle were of the party--Mr Pardiggle, an obstinate-
looking man with a large waistcoat and stubbly hair, who was always
talking in a loud bass voice about his mite, or Mrs Pardiggle's mite, or
their five boys' mites. Mr Quale, with his hair brushed back as usual
and his knobs of temples shining very much, was also there, not in
the character of a disappointed lover, but as the accepted of a young--
at least, an unmarried--lady, a Miss Wisk, who was also there. Miss
Wisk's mission, my guardian said, was to show the world that
woman's mission was man's mission and that the only genuine
mission of both man and woman was to be always moving declaratory
resolutions about things in general at public meetings. The guests
were few, but were, as one might expect at Mrs Jellyby's, all devoted to
public objects only. Besides those I have mentioned, there was an
extremely dirty lady with her bonnet all awry and the ticketed price of
her dress still sticking on it, whose neglected home, Caddy told me,
was like a filthy wilderness, but whose church was like a fancy fair. A
very contentious gentleman, who said it was his mission to be
everybody's brother but who appeared to be on terms of coolness with
the whole of his large family, completed the party.

A party, having less in common with such an occasion, could hardly
have been got together by any ingenuity. Such a mean mission as the
domestic mission was the very last thing to be endured among them;
indeed, Miss Wisk informed us, with great indignation, before we sat
down to breakfast, that the idea of woman's mission lying chiefly in
the narrow sphere of home was an outrageous slander on the part of
her tyrant, man. One other singularity was that nobody with a
mission--except Mr Quale, whose mission, as I think I have formerly
said, was to be in ecstasies with everybody's mission-- cared at all for
anybody's mission. Mrs Pardiggle being as clear that the only one
infallible course was her course of pouncing upon the poor and
applying benevolence to them like a strait-waistcoat; as Miss Wisk was
that the only practical thing for the world was the emancipation of
woman from the thraldom of her tyrant, man. Mrs Jellyby, all the
while, sat smiling at the limited vision that could see anything but
Borrioboola-Gha.

But I am anticipating now the purport of our conversation on the ride
home instead of first marrying Caddy. We all went to church, and Mr
Jellyby gave her away. Of the air with which old Mr Turveydrop, with
his hat under his left arm (the inside presented at the clergyman like a
cannon) and his eyes creasing themselves up into his wig, stood stiff
and high-shouldered behind us bridesmaids during the ceremony,
and afterwards saluted us, I could never say enough to do it justice.
Miss Wisk, whom I cannot report as prepossessing in appearance, and
whose manner was grim, listened to the proceedings, as part of
woman's wrongs, with a disdainful face. Mrs Jellyby, with her calm
smile and her bright eyes, looked the least concerned of all the
company.

We duly came back to breakfast, and Mrs Jellyby sat at the head of
the table and Mr Jellyby at the foot. Caddy had previously stolen
upstairs to hug the children again and tell them that her name was
Turveydrop. But this piece of information, instead of being an
agreeable surprise to Peepy, threw him on his back in such transports
of kicking grief that I could do nothing on being sent for but accede to
the proposal that he should be admitted to the breakfast table. So he
came down and sat in my lap; and Mrs Jellyby, after saying, in
reference to the state of his pinafore, ‘Oh, you naughty Peepy, what a
shocking little pig you are!’ was not at all discomposed. He was very
good except that he brought down Noah with him (out of an ark I had
given him before we went to church) and WOULD dip him head first
into the wine-glasses and then put him in his mouth.
My guardian, with his sweet temper and his quick perception and his
amiable face, made something agreeable even out of the ungenial
company. None of them seemed able to talk about anything but his, or
her, own one subject, and none of them seemed able to talk about
even that as part of a world in which there was anything else; but my
guardian turned it all to the merry encouragement of Caddy and the
honour of the occasion, and brought us through the breakfast nobly.
What we should have done without him, I am afraid to think, for all
the company despising the bride and bridegroom and old Mr
Turveydrop--and old Mr Thurveydrop, in virtue of his deportment,
considering himself vastly superior to all the company--it was a very
unpromising case.

At last the time came when poor Caddy was to go and when all her
property was packed on the hired coach and pair that was to take her
and her husband to Gravesend. It affected us to see Caddy clinging,
then, to her deplorable home and hanging on her mother's neck with
the greatest tenderness.

T am very sorry I couldn't go on writing from dictation, Ma,’ sobbed
Caddy. I hope you forgive me now.’

‘Oh, Caddy, Caddy!’ said Mrs Jellyby. I have told you over and over
again that I have engaged a boy, and there's an end of it.’

‘You are sure you are not the least angry with me, Ma? Say you are
sure before I go away, Ma?’

‘You foolish Caddy,’ returned Mrs Jellyby, ‘do I look angry, or have I
inclination to be angry, or time to be angry? How CAN you?’

‘Take a little care of Pa while Iam gone, Mamal’

Mrs Jellyby positively laughed at the fancy. ‘You romantic child,’ said
she, lightly patting Caddy's back. ‘Go along. I am excellent friends
with you. Now, good-bye, Caddy, and be very happy!’

Then Caddy hung upon her father and nursed his cheek against hers
as if he were some poor dull child in pain. All this took place in the
hall. Her father released her, took out his pocket handkerchief, and
sat down on the stairs with his head against the wall. I hope he found
some consolation in walls. I almost think he did.

And then Prince took her arm in his and turned with great emotion
and respect to his father, whose deportment at that moment was
overwhelming.
‘Thank you over and over again, father!’ said Prince, kissing his hand.
T am very grateful for all your kindness and consideration regarding
our marriage, and so, I can assure you, is Caddy.’

Very,’ sobbed Caddy. ‘Ve-ry!’

‘My dear son,’ said Mr Turveydrop, ‘and dear daughter, I have done
my duty. If the spirit of a sainted wooman hovers above us and looks
down on the occasion, that, and your constant affection, will be my
recompense. You will not fail in YOUR duty, my son and daughter, I
believe?’

‘Dear father, never!’ cried Prince.
‘Never, never, dear Mr Turveydrop!’ said Caddy.

‘This,’ returned Mr Turveydrop, ‘is as it should be. My children, my
home is yours, my heart is yours, my all is yours. I will never leave
you; nothing but death shall part us. My dear son, you contemplate
an absence of a week, I think?’

‘A week, dear father. We shall return home this day week.’

‘My dear child,’ said Mr Turveydrop, ‘let me, even under the present
exceptional circumstances, recommend strict punctuality. It is highly
important to keep the connexion together; and schools, if at all
neglected, are apt to take offence.’

‘This day week, father, we shall be sure to be home to dinner.’

‘Good!’ said Mr Turveydrop. ‘You will find fires, my dear Caroline, in
your own room, and dinner prepared in my apartment. Yes, yes,
Prince!’ anticipating some self-denying objection on his son's part with
a great air. ‘You and our Caroline will be strange in the upper part of
the premises and will, therefore, dine that day in my apartment. Now,
bless ye!’

They drove away, and whether I wondered most at Mrs Jellyby or at
Mr Turveydrop, I did not know. Ada and my guardian were in the
same condition when we came to talk it over. But before we drove
away too, I received a most unexpected and eloquent compliment from
Mr Jellyby. He came up to me in the hall, took both my hands,
pressed them earnestly, and opened his mouth twice. I was so sure of
his meaning that I said, quite flurried, ‘You are very welcome, sir. Pray
don't mention it!’

T hope this marriage is for the best, guardian,’ said I when we three
were on our road home.
T hope it is, little woman. Patience. We shall see.’

Ts the wind in the east to-day?’ I ventured to ask him.
He laughed heartily and answered, ‘No.’

‘But it must have been this morning, I think,’ said I.

He answered ‘No’ again, and this time my dear girl confidently
answered ‘No’ too and shook the lovely head which, with its blooming
flowers against the golden hair, was like the very spring. ‘Much YOU
know of east winds, my ugly darling,’ said I, kissing her in my
admiration--I couldn't help it.

Well! It was only their love for me, I know very well, and it is a long
time ago. I must write it even if I rub it out again, because it gives me
so much pleasure. They said there could be no east wind where
Somebody was; they said that wherever Dame Durden went, there was
sunshine and summer air.
Chapter XXXI - Nurse and Patient

I had not been at home again many days when one evening I went
upstairs into my own room to take a peep over Charley's shoulder and
see how she was getting on with her copy-book. Writing was a trying
business to Charley, who seemed to have no natural power over a pen,
but in whose hand every pen appeared to become perversely
animated, and to go wrong and crooked, and to stop, and splash, and
sidle into corners like a saddle-donkey. It was very odd to see what old
letters Charley's young hand had made, they so wrinkled, and
shrivelled, and tottering, it so plump and round. Yet Charley was
uncommonly expert at other things and had as nimble little fingers as
I ever watched.

‘Well, Charley,’ said I, looking over a copy of the letter O in which it
was represented as square, triangular, pear-shaped, and collapsed in
all kinds of ways, ‘we are improving. If we only get to make it round,
we shall be perfect, Charley.’

Then I made one, and Charley made one, and the pen wouldn't join
Charley's neatly, but twisted it up into a knot.

‘Never mind, Charley. We shall do it in time.’

Charley laid down her pen, the copy being finished, opened and shut
her cramped little hand, looked gravely at the page, half in pride and
half in doubt, and got up, and dropped me a curtsy.

‘Thank you, miss. If you please, miss, did you know a poor person of
the name of Jenny?’

‘A brickmaker's wife, Charley? Yes.’

‘She came and spoke to me when I was out a little while ago, and said
you knew her, miss. She asked me if I wasn't the young lady's little
maid--meaning you for the young lady, miss--and I said yes, miss.’

T thought she had left this neighbourhood altogether, Charley.’

‘So she had, miss, but she's come back again to where she used to
live--she and Liz. Did you know another poor person of the name of
Liz, miss?’

T think I do, Charley, though not by name.’

‘That's what she said!’ returned Charley. They have both come back,
miss, and have been tramping high and low.’
‘Tramping high and low, have they, Charley?’

‘Yes, miss.’ If Charley could only have made the letters in her copy as
round as the eyes with which she looked into my face, they would
have been excellent. ‘And this poor person came about the house
three or four days, hoping to get a glimpse of you, miss--all she
wanted, she said--but you were away. That was when she saw me.
She saw me a-going about, miss,’ said Charley with a short laugh of
the greatest delight and pride, ‘and she thought I looked like your
maid!’

‘Did she though, really, Charley?’

‘Yes, miss!’ said Charley. ‘Really and truly.’ And Charley, with another
short laugh of the purest glee, made her eyes very round again and
looked as serious as became my maid. I was never tired of seeing
Charley in the full enjoyment of that great dignity, standing before me
with her youthful face and figure, and her steady manner, and her
childish exultation breaking through it now and then in the
pleasantest way.

‘And where did you see her, Charley?’ said I.

My little maid's countenance fell as she replied, ‘By the doctor's shop,
miss.’ For Charley wore her black frock yet.

I asked if the brickmaker's wife were ill, but Charley said no. It was
some one else. Some one in her cottage who had tramped down to
Saint Albans and was tramping he didn't know where. A poor boy,
Charley said. No father, no mother, no any one. ‘Like as Tom might
have been, miss, if Emma and me had died after father,’ said Charley,
her round eyes filling with tears.

‘And she was getting medicine for him, Charley?’

‘She said, miss,’ returned Charley, ‘how that he had once done as
much for her.’

My little maid's face was so eager and her quiet hands were folded so
closely in one another as she stood looking at me that I had no great
difficulty in reading her thoughts. ‘Well, Charley,’ said I, it appears to
me that you and I can do no better than go round to Jenny's and see
what's the matter.’

The alacrity with which Charley brought my bonnet and veil, and
having dressed me, quaintly pinned herself into her warm shawl and
made herself look like a little old woman, sufficiently expressed her
readiness. So Charley and I, without saying anything to any one, went
out.

It was a cold, wild night, and the trees shuddered in the wind. The
rain had been thick and heavy all day, and with little intermission for
many days. None was falling just then, however. The sky had partly
cleared, but was very gloomy--even above us, where a few stars were
shining. In the north and north-west, where the sun had set three
hours before, there was a pale dead light both beautiful and awful;
and into it long sullen lines of cloud waved up like a sea stricken
immovable as it was heaving. Towards London a lurid glare overhung
the whole dark waste, and the contrast between these two lights, and
the fancy which the redder light engendered of an unearthly fire,
gleaming on all the unseen buildings of the city and on all the faces of
its many thousands of wondering inhabitants, was as solemn as
might be.

I had no thought that night--none, I am quite sure--of what was soon
to happen to me. But I have always remembered since that when we
had stopped at the garden-gate to look up at the sky, and when we
went upon our way, I had for a moment an undefinable impression of
myself as being something different from what I then was. I know it
was then and there that I had it. I have ever since connected the
feeling with that spot and time and with everything associated with
that spot and time, to the distant voices in the town, the barking of a
dog, and the sound of wheels coming down the miry hill.

It was Saturday night, and most of the people belonging to the place
where we were going were drinking elsewhere. We found it quieter
than I had previously seen it, though quite as miserable. The kilns
were burning, and a stifling vapour set towards us with a pale-blue
glare.

We came to the cottage, where there was a feeble candle in the
patched window. We tapped at the door and went in. The mother of
the little child who had died was sitting in a chair on one side of the
poor fire by the bed; and opposite to her, a wretched boy, supported
by the chimney-piece, was cowering on the floor. He held under his
arm, like a little bundle, a fragment of a fur cap; and as he tried to
warm himself, he shook until the crazy door and window shook. The
place was closer than before and had an unhealthy and a very
peculiar smell.

I had not lifted my veil when I first spoke to the woman, which was at
the moment of our going in. The boy staggered up instantly and stared
at me with a remarkable expression of surprise and terror.
His action was so quick and my being the cause of it was so evident
that I stood still instead of advancing nearer.

T won't go no more to the berryin ground,’ muttered the boy; J ain't a-
going there, so I tell you!’

I lifted my veil and spoke to the woman. She said to me in a low voice,
‘Don't mind him, ma'am. He'll soon come back to his head,’ and said
to him, Uo, Jo, what's the matter?’

T know wot she's come for!’ cried the boy.
‘Who?’

‘The lady there. She's come to get me to go along with her to the
berryin ground. I won't go to the berryin ground. I don't like the name
on it. She might go a-berryin ME.’ His shivering came on again, and
as he leaned against the wall, he shook the hovel.

‘He has been talking off and on about such like all day, ma'am,’ said
Jenny softly. ‘Why, how you stare! This is MY lady, Jo.’

Is it?’ returned the boy doubtfully, and surveying me with his arm
held out above his burning eyes. ‘She looks to me the t'other one. It
ain't the bonnet, nor yet it ain't the gownd, but she looks to me the
t'other one.’

My little Charley, with her premature experience of illness and
trouble, had pulled off her bonnet and shawl and now went quietly up
to him with a chair and sat him down in it like an old sick nurse.
Except that no such attendant could have shown him Charley's
youthful face, which seemed to engage his confidence.

T say!’ said the boy. ‘YOU tell me. Ain't the lady the t'other lady?’

Charley shook her head as she methodically drew his rags about him
and made him as warm as she could.

‘Oh!’ the boy muttered. ‘Then I s'pose she ain't.’

T came to see if I could do you any good,’ said I. ‘What is the matter
with you?’

Tm a-being froze,’ returned the boy hoarsely, with his haggard gaze
wandering about me, ‘and then burnt up, and then froze, and then
burnt up, ever so many times in a hour. And my head's all sleepy, and
all a-going mad-like--and I'm so dry--and my bones isn't half so much
bones as pain.’
‘When did he come here?’ I asked the woman.

This morning, ma'am, I found him at the corner of the town. I had
known him up in London yonder. Hadn't I, Jo?’

‘Tom-all-Alone's,’ the boy replied.

Whenever he fixed his attention or his eyes, it was only for a very little
while. He soon began to droop his head again, and roll it heavily, and
speak as if he were half awake.

‘When did he come from London?’ I asked.

IT come from London yes'day,’ said the boy himself, now flushed and
hot. ‘I'm a-going somewheres.’

‘Where is he going?’ I asked.

‘Somewheres,’ repeated the boy in a louder tone. I have been moved
on, and moved on, more nor ever I was afore, since the t'other one give
me the sov'ring. Mrs Snagsby, she's always a- watching, and a-driving
of me--what have I done to her?--and they're all a-watching and a-
driving of me. Every one of 'em's doing of it, from the time when I don't
get up, to the time when I don't go to bed. And I'm a-going
somewheres. That's where I'm a- going. She told me, down in Tom-all-
Alone's, as she came from Stolbuns, and so I took the Stolbuns Road.
It's as good as another.’

He always concluded by addressing Charley.

‘What is to be done with him?’ said I, taking the woman aside. ‘He
could not travel in this state even if he had a purpose and knew where
he was going!’

IT know no more, ma'am, than the dead,’ she replied, glancing
compassionately at him. ‘Perhaps the dead know better, if they could
only tell us. I've kept him here all day for pity's sake, and I've given
him broth and physic, and Liz has gone to try if any one will take him
in (here's my pretty in the bed--her child, but I call it mine); but I can't
keep him long, for if my husband was to come home and find him
here, he'd be rough in putting him out and might do him a hurt. Hark!
Here comes Liz back!’

The other woman came hurriedly in as she spoke, and the boy got up
with a half-obscured sense that he was expected to be going. When
the little child awoke, and when and how Charley got at it, took it out
of bed, and began to walk about hushing it, I don't know. There she
was, doing all this in a quiet motherly manner as if she were living in
Mrs Blinder's attic with Tom and Emma again.

The friend had been here and there, and had been played about from
hand to hand, and had come back as she went. At first it was too
early for the boy to be received into the proper refuge, and at last it
was too late. One official sent her to another, and the other sent her
back again to the first, and so backward and forward, until it
appeared to me as if both must have been appointed for their skill in
evading their duties instead of performing them. And now, after all,
she said, breathing quickly, for she had been running and was
frightened too, ‘Jenny, your master's on the road home, and mine's
not far behind, and the Lord help the boy, for we can do no more for
him!’ They put a few halfpence together and hurried them into his
hand, and so, in an oblivious, half-thankful, half-insensible way, he
shuffled out of the house.

‘Give me the child, my dear,’ said its mother to Charley, ‘and thank
you kindly too! Jenny, woman dear, good night! Young lady, if my
master don't fall out with me, I'll look down by the kiln by and by,
where the boy will be most like, and again in the morning!’ She
hurried off, and presently we passed her hushing and singing to her
child at her own door and looking anxiously along the road for her
drunken husband. I was afraid of staying then to speak to either
woman, lest I should bring her into trouble. But I said to Charley that
we must not leave the boy to die. Charley, who knew what to do much
better than I did, and whose quickness equalled her presence of mind,
glided on before me, and presently we came up with Jo, just short of
the brick-kiln.

I think he must have begun his journey with some small bundle under
his arm and must have had it stolen or lost it. For he still carried his
wretched fragment of fur cap like a bundle, though he went bare-
headed through the rain, which now fell fast. He stopped when we
called to him and again showed a dread of me when I came up,
standing with his lustrous eyes fixed upon me, and even arrested in
his shivering fit.

I asked him to come with us, and we would take care that he had
some shelter for the night.

T don't want no shelter,’ he said; I can lay amongst the warm bricks.’
‘But don't you know that people die there?’ replied Charley.
‘They dies everywheres,’ said the boy. ‘They dies in their lodgings--she

knows where; I showed her--and they dies down in Tom- all-Alone's in
heaps. They dies more than they lives, according to what I see.’ Then
he hoarsely whispered Charley, Tf she ain't the t'other one, she ain't
the forrenner. Is there THREE of 'em then?’

Charley looked at me a little frightened. I felt half frightened at myself
when the boy glared on me so.

But he turned and followed when I beckoned to him, and finding that
he acknowledged that influence in me, I led the way straight home. It
was not far, only at the summit of the hill. We passed but one man. I
doubted if we should have got home without assistance, the boy's
steps were so uncertain and tremulous. He made no complaint,
however, and was strangely unconcerned about himself, if I may say
so strange a thing.

Leaving him in the hall for a moment, shrunk into the corner of the
window-seat and staring with an indifference that scarcely could be
called wonder at the comfort and brightness about him, I went into
the drawing-room to speak to my guardian. There I found Mr
Skimpole, who had come down by the coach, as he frequently did
without notice, and never bringing any clothes with him, but always
borrowing everything he wanted.

They came out with me directly to look at the boy. The servants had
gathered in the hall too, and he shivered in the window-seat with
Charley standing by him, like some wounded animal that had been
found in a ditch. This is a sorrowful case,’ said my guardian after
asking him a question or two and touching him and examining his
eyes. ‘What do you say, Harold?’

‘You had better turn him out,’ said Mr Skimpole.
‘What do you mean?’ inquired my guardian, almost sternly.

‘My dear Jarndyce,’ said Mr Skimpole, ‘you know what Iam: I ama
child. Be cross to me if I deserve it. But I have a constitutional
objection to this sort of thing. I always had, when I was a medical
man. He's not safe, you know. There's a very bad sort of fever about
him.’

Mr Skimpole had retreated from the hall to the drawing-room again
and said this in his airy way, seated on the music-stool as we stood
by.

‘You'll say it's childish,’ observed Mr Skimpole, looking gaily at us.
‘Well, I dare say it may be; but I AM a child, and I never pretend to be
anything else. If you put him out in the road, you only put him where
he was before. He will be no worse off than he was, you know. Even
make him better off, if you like. Give him sixpence, or five shillings, or
five pound ten--you are arithmeticians, and I am not--and get rid of
him!’

‘And what is he to do then?’ asked my guardian.

Upon my life,’ said Mr Skimpole, shrugging his shoulders with his
engaging smile, I have not the least idea what he is to do then. But I
have no doubt he'll do it.’

‘Now, is it not a horrible reflection,’ said my guardian, to whom I had
hastily explained the unavailing efforts of the two women, ‘is it not a
horrible reflection,’ walking up and down and rumpling his hair, ‘that
if this wretched creature were a convicted prisoner, his hospital would
be wide open to him, and he would be as well taken care of as any
sick boy in the kingdom?’

‘My dear Jarndyce,’ returned Mr Skimpole, ‘you'll pardon the
simplicity of the question, coming as it does from a creature who is
perfectly simple in worldly matters, but why ISN'T he a prisoner then?’

My guardian stopped and looked at him with a whimsical mixture of
amusement and indignation in his face.

‘Our young friend is not to be suspected of any delicacy, I should
imagine,’ said Mr Skimpole, unabashed and candid. ‘It seems to me
that it would be wiser, as well as in a certain kind of way more
respectable, if he showed some misdirected energy that got him into
prison. There would be more of an adventurous spirit in it, and
consequently more of a certain sort of poetry.’

T believe,’ returned my guardian, resuming his uneasy walk, ‘that
there is not such another child on earth as yourself.’

‘Do you really?’ said Mr Skimpole. I dare say! But I confess I don't see
why our young friend, in his degree, should not seek to invest himself
with such poetry as is open to him. He is no doubt born with an
appetite--probably, when he is in a safer state of health, he has an
excellent appetite. Very well. At our young friend's natural dinner
hour, most likely about noon, our young friend says in effect to
society, 'I am hungry; will you have the goodness to produce your
spoon and feed me?’ Society, which has taken upon itself the general
arrangement of the whole system of spoons and professes to have a
spoon for our young friend, does NOT produce that spoon; and our
young friend, therefore, says 'You really must excuse me if I seize it.'
Now, this appears to me a case of misdirected energy, which has a
certain amount of reason in it and a certain amount of romance; and I
don't know but what I should be more interested in our young friend,
as an illustration of such a case, than merely as a poor vagabond--
which any one can be.’

In the meantime,’ I ventured to observe, ‘he is getting worse.’

In the meantime,’ said Mr Skimpole cheerfully, ‘as Miss Summerson,
with her practical good sense, observes, he is getting worse. Therefore
I recommend your turning him out before he gets still worse.’

The amiable face with which he said it, I think I shall never forget.

‘Of course, little woman,’ observed my guardian, turning to me, T can
ensure his admission into the proper place by merely going there to
enforce it, though it's a bad state of things when, in his condition, that
is necessary. But it's growing late, and is a very bad night, and the
boy is worn out already. There is a bed in the wholesome loft-room by
the stable; we had better keep him there till morning, when he can be
wrapped up and removed. We'll do that.’

‘Oh!’ said Mr Skimpole, with his hands upon the keys of the piano as
we moved away. ‘Are you going back to our young friend?’

‘Yes,’ said my guardian.

‘How I envy you your constitution, Jarndyce!’ returned Mr Skimpole
with playful admiration. ‘You don't mind these things; neither does
Miss Summerson. You are ready at all times to go anywhere, and do
anything. Such is will! I have no will at all--and no won't--simply
can't.’

‘YYou can't recommend anything for the boy, I suppose?’ said my
guardian, looking back over his shoulder half angrily; only half
angrily, for he never seemed to consider Mr Skimpole an accountable
being.

‘My dear Jarndyce, I observed a bottle of cooling medicine in his
pocket, and it's impossible for him to do better than take it. You can
tell them to sprinkle a little vinegar about the place where he sleeps
and to keep it moderately cool and him moderately warm. But it is
mere impertinence in me to offer any recommendation. Miss
Summerson has such a knowledge of detail and such a capacity for
the administration of detail that she knows all about it.’

We went back into the hall and explained to Jo what we proposed to
do, which Charley explained to him again and which he received with
the languid unconcern I had already noticed, wearily looking on at
what was done as if it were for somebody else. The servants
compassionating his miserable state and being very anxious to help,
we soon got the loft-room ready; and some of the men about the house
carried him across the wet yard, well wrapped up. It was pleasant to
observe how kind they were to him and how there appeared to be a
general impression among them that frequently calling him ‘Old Chap’
was likely to revive his spirits. Charley directed the operations and
went to and fro between the loft-room and the house with such little
stimulants and comforts as we thought it safe to give him. My
guardian himself saw him before he was left for the night and reported
to me when he returned to the growlery to write a letter on the boy's
behalf, which a messenger was charged to deliver at day-light in the
morning, that he seemed easier and inclined to sleep. They had
fastened his door on the outside, he said, in case of his being
delirious, but had so arranged that he could not make any noise
without being heard.

Ada being in our room with a cold, Mr Skimpole was left alone all this
time and entertained himself by playing snatches of pathetic airs and
sometimes singing to them (as we heard at a distance) with great
expression and feeling. When we rejoined him in the drawing- room he
said he would give us a little ballad which had come into his head
‘apropos of our young friend,’ and he sang one about a peasant boy,

‘Thrown on the wide world, doomed to wander and roam, Bereft of his
parents, bereft of a home.’

quite exquisitely. It was a song that always made him cry, he told us.

He was extremely gay all the rest of the evening, for he absolutely
chirped--those were his delighted words--when he thought by what a
happy talent for business he was surrounded. He gave us, in his glass
of negus, ‘Better health to our young friend!’ and supposed and gaily
pursued the case of his being reserved like Whittington to become
Lord Mayor of London. In that event, no doubt, he would establish the
Jarndyce Institution and the Summerson Almshouses, and a little
annual Corporation Pilgrimage to St. Albans. He had no doubt, he
said, that our young friend was an excellent boy in his way, but his
way was not the Harold Skimpole way; what Harold Skimpole was,
Harold Skimpole had found himself, to his considerable surprise,
when he first made his own acquaintance; he had accepted himself
with all his failings and had thought it sound philosophy to make the
best of the bargain; and he hoped we would do the same.

Charley's last report was that the boy was quiet. I could see, from my
window, the lantern they had left him burning quietly; and I went to
bed very happy to think that he was sheltered.

There was more movement and more talking than usual a little before
daybreak, and it awoke me. As I was dressing, I looked out of my
window and asked one of our men who had been among the active
sympathizers last night whether there was anything wrong about the
house. The lantern was still burning in the loft-window.

It's the boy, miss,’ said he.

Ts he worse?’ I inquired.

‘Gone, miss.’

‘Dead!’

‘Dead, miss? No. Gone clean off.’

At what time of the night he had gone, or how, or why, it seemed
hopeless ever to divine. The door remaining as it had been left, and
the lantern standing in the window, it could only be supposed that he
had got out by a trap in the floor which communicated with an empty
cart-house below. But he had shut it down again, if that were so; and
it looked as if it had not been raised. Nothing of any kind was missing.
On this fact being clearly ascertained, we all yielded to the painful
belief that delirium had come upon him in the night and that, allured
by some imaginary object or pursued by some imaginary horror, he
had strayed away in that worse than helpless state; all of us, that is to
say, but Mr Skimpole, who repeatedly suggested, in his usual easy
light style, that it had occurred to our young friend that he was not a
safe inmate, having a bad kind of fever upon him, and that he had
with great natural politeness taken himself off.

Every possible inquiry was made, and every place was searched. The
brick-kilns were examined, the cottages were visited, the two women
were particularly questioned, but they knew nothing of him, and
nobody could doubt that their wonder was genuine. The weather had
for some time been too wet and the night itself had been too wet to
admit of any tracing by footsteps. Hedge and ditch, and wall, and rick
and stack, were examined by our men for a long distance round, lest
the boy should be lying in such a place insensible or dead; but
nothing was seen to indicate that he had ever been near. From the
time when he was left in the loft-room, he vanished.

The search continued for five days. I do not mean that it ceased even
then, but that my attention was then diverted into a current very
memorable to me.

As Charley was at her writing again in my room in the evening, and as
I sat opposite to her at work, I felt the table tremble. Looking up, I saw
my little maid shivering from head to foot.
‘Charley,’ said I, ‘are you so cold?’

T think I am, miss,’ she replied. ‘I don't know what it is. I can't hold
myself still. I felt so yesterday at about this same time, miss. Don't be
uneasy, I think I'm ill.’

I heard Ada's voice outside, and I hurried to the door of
communication between my room and our pretty sitting-room, and
locked it. Just in time, for she tapped at it while my hand was yet
upon the key.

Ada called to me to let her in, but I said, ‘Not now, my dearest. Go
away. There's nothing the matter; I will come to you presently.’ Ah! It
was a long, long time before my darling girl and I were companions
again.

Charley fell ill. In twelve hours she was very ill. I moved her to my
room, and laid her in my bed, and sat down quietly to nurse her. I told
my guardian all about it, and why I felt it was necessary that I should
seclude myself, and my reason for not seeing my darling above all. At
first she came very often to the door, and called to me, and even
reproached me with sobs and tears; but I wrote her a long letter
saying that she made me anxious and unhappy and imploring her, as
she loved me and wished my mind to be at peace, to come no nearer
than the garden. After that she came beneath the window even oftener
than she had come to the door, and if I had learnt to love her dear
sweet voice before when we were hardly ever apart, how did I learn to
love it then, when I stood behind the window-curtain listening and
replying, but not so much as looking out! How did I learn to love it
afterwards, when the harder time came!

They put a bed for me in our sitting-room; and by keeping the door
wide open, I turned the two rooms into one, now that Ada had vacated
that part of the house, and kept them always fresh and airy. There
was not a servant in or about the house but was so good that they
would all most gladly have come to me at any hour of the day or night
without the least fear or unwillingness, but I thought it best to choose
one worthy woman who was never to see Ada and whom I could trust
to come and go with all precaution. Through her means I got out to
take the air with my guardian when there was no fear of meeting Ada,
and wanted for nothing in the way of attendance, any more than in
any other respect.

And thus poor Charley sickened and grew worse, and fell into heavy
danger of death, and lay severely ill for many a long round of day and
night. So patient she was, so uncomplaining, and inspired by such a
gentle fortitude that very often as I sat by Charley holding her head in
my arms--repose would come to her, so, when it would come to her in
no other attitude--I silently prayed to our Father in heaven that I
might not forget the lesson which this little sister taught me.

I was very sorrowful to think that Charley's pretty looks would change
and be disfigured, even if she recovered--she was such a child with
her dimpled face--but that thought was, for the greater part, lost in
her greater peril. When she was at the worst, and her mind rambled
again to the cares of her father's sick bed and the little children, she
still knew me so far as that she would be quiet in my arms when she
could lie quiet nowhere else, and murmur out the wanderings of her
mind less restlessly. At those times I used to think, how should I ever
tell the two remaining babies that the baby who had learned of her
faithful heart to be a mother to them in their need was dead!

There were other times when Charley knew me well and talked to me,
telling me that she sent her love to Tom and Emma and that she was
sure Tom would grow up to be a good man. At those times Charley
would speak to me of what she had read to her father as well as she
could to comfort him, of that young man carried out to be buried who
was the only son of his mother and she was a widow, of the ruler's
daughter raised up by the gracious hand upon her bed of death. And
Charley told me that when her father died she had kneeled down and
prayed in her first sorrow that he likewise might be raised up and
given back to his poor children, and that if she should never get better
and should die too, she thought it likely that it might come into Tom's
mind to offer the same prayer for her. Then would I show Tom how
these people of old days had been brought back to life on earth, only
that we might know our hope to be restored to heaven!

But of all the various times there were in Charley's illness, there was
not one when she lost the gentle qualities I have spoken of. And there
were many, many when I thought in the night of the last high belief in
the watching angel, and the last higher trust in God, on the part of
her poor despised father.

And Charley did not die. She flutteringly and slowly turned the
dangerous point, after long lingering there, and then began to mend.
The hope that never had been given, from the first, of Charley being in
outward appearance Charley any more soon began to be encouraged;
and even that prospered, and I saw her growing into her old childish
likeness again.

It was a great morning when I could tell Ada all this as she stood out
in the garden; and it was a great evening when Charley and I at last
took tea together in the next room. But on that same evening, I felt
that I was stricken cold.
Happily for both of us, it was not until Charley was safe in bed again
and placidly asleep that I began to think the contagion of her illness
was upon me. I had been able easily to hide what I felt at tea-time, but
I was past that already now, and I knew that I was rapidly following in
Charley's steps.

I was well enough, however, to be up early in the morning, and to
return my darling's cheerful blessing from the garden, and to talk with
her as long as usual. But I was not free from an impression that I had
been walking about the two rooms in the night, a little beside myself,
though knowing where I was; and I felt confused at times--with a
curious sense of fullness, as if I were becoming too large altogether.

In the evening I was so much worse that I resolved to prepare Charley,
with which view I said, ‘You're getting quite strong, Charley, are you
not?’

‘Oh, quite!’ said Charley.
‘Strong enough to be told a secret, I think, Charley?’

‘Quite strong enough for that, miss!’ cried Charley. But Charley's face
fell in the height of her delight, for she saw the secret in MY face; and
she came out of the great chair, and fell upon my bosom, and said
‘Oh, miss, it's my doing! It's my doing!’ and a great deal more out of
the fullness of her grateful heart.

‘Now, Charley,’ said I after letting her go on for a little while, if I am to
be ill, my great trust, humanly speaking, is in you. And unless you are
as quiet and composed for me as you always were for yourself, you
can never fulfil it, Charley.’

‘Tf you'll let me cry a little longer, miss,’ said Charley. ‘Oh, my dear, my
dear! If you'll only let me cry a little longer. Oh, my dear!’--how
affectionately and devotedly she poured this out as she clung to my
neck, I never can remember without tears--7'll be good.’

So I let Charley cry a little longer, and it did us both good.

‘Trust in me now, if you please, miss,’ said Charley quietly. I am
listening to everything you say.’

It's very little at present, Charley. I shall tell your doctor to-night that
I don't think I am well and that you are going to nurse me.’

For that the poor child thanked me with her whole heart. ‘And in the
morning, when you hear Miss Ada in the garden, if I should not be
quite able to go to the window-curtain as usual, do you go, Charley,
and say I am asleep--that I have rather tired myself, and am asleep. At
all times keep the room as I have kept it, Charley, and let no one
come.’

Charley promised, and I lay down, for I was very heavy. I saw the
doctor that night and asked the favour of him that I wished to ask
relative to his saying nothing of my illness in the house as yet. I have
a very indistinct remembrance of that night melting into day, and of
day melting into night again; but I was just able on the first morning
to get to the window and speak to my darling.

On the second morning I heard her dear voice--Oh, how dear now!--
outside; and I asked Charley, with some difficulty (speech being
painful to me), to go and say I was asleep. I heard her answer softly,
‘Don't disturb her, Charley, for the world!’

‘How does my own Pride look, Charley?’ I inquired.

‘Disappointed, miss,’ said Charley, peeping through the curtain.

‘But I know she is very beautiful this morning.’

‘She is indeed, miss,’ answered Charley, peeping. ‘Still looking up at
the window.’

With her blue clear eyes, God bless them, always loveliest when raised
like that!

I called Charley to me and gave her her last charge.

‘Now, Charley, when she knows I am ill, she will try to make her way
into the room. Keep her out, Charley, if you love me truly, to the last!
Charley, if you let her in but once, only to look upon me for one
moment as I lie here, I shall die.’

T never will! I never will!’ she promised me.
T believe it, my dear Charley. And now come and sit beside me for a

little while, and touch me with your hand. For I cannot see you,
Charley; I am blind.’
Chapter XXXII - The Appointed Time

It is night in Lincoln's Inn--perplexed and troublous valley of the
shadow of the law, where suitors generally find but little day--and fat
candles are snuffed out in offices, and clerks have rattled down the
crazy wooden stairs and dispersed. The bell that rings at nine o'clock
has ceased its doleful clangour about nothing; the gates are shut; and
the night-porter, a solemn warder with a mighty power of sleep, keeps
guard in his lodge. From tiers of staircase windows clogged lamps like
the eyes of Equity, bleared Argus with a fathomless pocket for every
eye and an eye upon it, dimly blink at the stars. In dirty upper
casements, here and there, hazy little patches of candlelight reveal
where some wise draughtsman and conveyancer yet toils for the
entanglement of real estate in meshes of sheep-skin, in the average
ratio of about a dozen of sheep to an acre of land. Over which bee-like
industry these benefactors of their species linger yet, though office-
hours be past, that they may give, for every day, some good account at
last.

In the neighbouring court, where the Lord Chancellor of the rag and
bottle shop dwells, there is a general tendency towards beer and
supper. Mrs Piper and Mrs Perkins, whose respective sons, engaged
with a circle of acquaintance in the game of hide and seek, have been
lying in ambush about the by-ways of Chancery Lane for some hours
and scouring the plain of the same thoroughfare to the confusion of
passengers--Mrs Piper and Mrs Perkins have but now exchanged
congratulations on the children being abed, and they still linger on a
door-step over a few parting words. Mr Krook and his lodger, and the
fact of Mr Krook's being ‘continually in liquor,’ and the testamentary
prospects of the young man are, as usual, the staple of their
conversation. But they have something to say, likewise, of the
Harmonic Meeting at the Sol's Arms, where the sound of the piano
through the partly opened windows jingles out into the court, and
where Little Swills, after keeping the lovers of harmony in a roar like a
very Yorick, may now be heard taking the gruff line in a concerted
piece and sentimentally adjuring his friends and patrons to ‘Listen,
listen, listen, tew the wa-ter fall!’ Mrs Perkins and Mrs Piper compare
opinions on the subject of the young lady of professional celebrity who
assists at the Harmonic Meetings and who has a space to herself in
the manuscript announcement in the window, Mrs Perkins possessing
information that she has been married a year and a half, though
announced as Miss M. Melvilleson, the noted siren, and that her baby
is clandestinely conveyed to the Sol's Arms every night to receive its
natural nourishment during the entertainments. ‘Sooner than which,
myself,’ says Mrs Perkins, I would get my living by selling lucifers.’
Mrs Piper, as in duty bound, is of the same opinion, holding that a
private station is better than public applause, and thanking heaven
for her own (and, by implication, Mrs Perkins') respectability. By this
time the pot-boy of the Sol's Arms appearing with her supper-pint well
frothed, Mrs Piper accepts that tankard and retires indoors, first
giving a fair good night to Mrs Perkins, who has had her own pint in
her hand ever since it was fetched from the same hostelry by young
Perkins before he was sent to bed. Now there is a sound of putting up
shop- shutters in the court and a smell as of the smoking of pipes;
and shooting stars are seen in upper windows, further indicating
retirement to rest. Now, too, the policeman begins to push at doors; to
try fastenings; to be suspicious of bundles; and to administer his beat,
on the hypothesis that every one is either robbing or being robbed.

It is a close night, though the damp cold is searching too, and there is
a laggard mist a little way up in the air. It is a fine steaming night to
turn the slaughter-houses, the unwholesome trades, the sewerage,
bad water, and burial-grounds to account, and give the registrar of
deaths some extra business. It may be something in the air--there is
plenty in it--or it may be something in himself that is in fault; but Mr
Weevle, otherwise Jobling, is very ill at ease. He comes and goes
between his own room and the open street door twenty times an hour.
He has been doing so ever since it fell dark. Since the Chancellor shut
up his shop, which he did very early to-night, Mr Weevle has been
down and up, and down and up (with a cheap tight velvet skull-cap on
his head, making his whiskers look out of all proportion), oftener than
before.

It is no phenomenon that Mr Snagsby should be ill at ease too, for he
always is so, more or less, under the oppressive influence of the secret
that is upon him. Impelled by the mystery of which he is a partaker
and yet in which he is not a sharer, Mr Snagsby haunts what seems
to be its fountain-head--the rag and bottle shop in the court. It has an
irresistible attraction for him. Even now, coming round by the Sol's
Arms with the intention of passing down the court, and out at the
Chancery Lane end, and so terminating his unpremeditated after-
supper stroll of ten minutes' long from his own door and back again,
Mr Snagsby approaches.

‘What, Mr Weevle?’ says the stationer, stopping to speak. ‘Are YOU
there?’

‘Aye!’ says Weevle, ‘Here Iam, Mr Snagsby.’

‘Airing yourself, as I am doing, before you go to bed?’ the stationer
inquires.

‘Why, there's not much air to be got here; and what there is, is not
very freshening,’ Weevle answers, glancing up and down the court.
Very true, sir. Don't you observe,’ says Mr Snagsby, pausing to sniff
and taste the air a little, ‘don't you observe, Mr Weevle, that you're--
not to put too fine a point upon it--that you're rather greasy here, sir?’

‘Why, I have noticed myself that there is a queer kind of flavour in the
place to-night,’ Mr Weevle rejoins. ‘I suppose it's chops at the Sol's
Arms.’

‘Chops, do you think? Oh! Chops, eh?’ Mr Snagsby sniffs and tastes
again. ‘Well, sir, I suppose it is. But I should say their cook at the Sol
wanted a little looking after. She has been burning 'em, sir! And I
don't think’--Mr Snagsby sniffs and tastes again and then spits and
wipes his mouth--71 don't think-- not to put too fine a point upon it--
that they were quite fresh when they were shown the gridiron.’

‘That's very likely. It's a tainting sort of weather.’

Tt IS a tainting sort of weather,’ says Mr Snagsby, ‘and I find it sinking
to the spirits.’

‘By George! I find it gives me the horrors,’ returns Mr Weevle.

‘Then, you see, you live in a lonesome way, and in a lonesome room,
with a black circumstance hanging over it,’ says Mr Snagsby, looking
in past the other's shoulder along the dark passage and then falling
back a step to look up at the house. ‘I couldn't live in that room alone,
as you do, sir. I should get so fidgety and worried of an evening,
sometimes, that I should be driven to come to the door and stand here
sooner than sit there. But then it's very true that you didn't see, in
your room, what I saw there. That makes a difference.’

T know quite enough about it,’ returns Tony.

‘It's not agreeable, is it?’ pursues Mr Snagsby, coughing his cough of
mild persuasion behind his hand. ‘Mr Krook ought to consider it in
the rent. I hope he does, I am sure.’

T hope he does,’ says Tony. ‘But I doubt it.’

‘You find the rent too high, do you, sir?’ returns the stationer. ‘Rents
ARE high about here. I don't know how it is exactly, but the law seems
to put things up in price. Not,’ adds Mr Snagsby with his apologetic
cough, ‘that I mean to say a word against the profession I get my living
by.’

Mr Weevle again glances up and down the court and then looks at the
stationer. Mr Snagsby, blankly catching his eye, looks upward for a
star or so and coughs a cough expressive of not exactly seeing his way
out of this conversation.

It's a curious fact, sir,’ he observes, slowly rubbing his hands, ‘that he
should have been--’

‘Who's he?’ interrupts Mr Weevle.

‘The deceased, you know,’ says Mr Snagsby, twitching his head and
right eyebrow towards the staircase and tapping his acquaintance on
the button.

‘Ah, to be sure!’ returns the other as if he were not over-fond of the
subject. ‘I thought we had done with him.’

IT was only going to say it's a curious fact, sir, that he should have
come and lived here, and been one of my writers, and then that you
should come and live here, and be one of my writers too. Which there
is nothing derogatory, but far from it in the appellation,’ says Mr
Snagsby, breaking off with a mistrust that he may have unpolitely
asserted a kind of proprietorship in Mr Weevle, ‘because I have known
writers that have gone into brewers' houses and done really very
respectable indeed. Eminently respectable, sir,’ adds Mr Snagsby with
a misgiving that he has not improved the matter.

It's a curious coincidence, as you say,’ answers Weevle, once more
glancing up and down the court.

‘Seems a fate in it, don't there?’ suggests the stationer.
‘There does.’

‘Just so,’ observes the stationer with his confirmatory cough. ‘Quite a
fate in it. Quite a fate. Well, Mr Weevle, I am afraid I must bid you
good night’--Mr Snagsby speaks as if it made him desolate to go,
though he has been casting about for any means of escape ever since
he stopped to speak--’my little woman will be looking for me else.
Good night, sir!’

If Mr Snagsby hastens home to save his little woman the trouble of
looking for him, he might set his mind at rest on that score. His little
woman has had her eye upon him round the Sol's Arms all this time
and now glides after him with a pocket handkerchief wrapped over her
head, honouring Mr Weevle and his doorway with a searching glance
as she goes past.
‘You'll know me again, ma'am, at all events,’ says Mr Weevle to
himself; ‘and I can't compliment you on your appearance, whoever you
are, with your head tied up in a bundle. Is this fellow NEVER coming!’

This fellow approaches as he speaks. Mr Weevle softly holds up his
finger, and draws him into the passage, and closes the street door.
Then they go upstairs, Mr Weevle heavily, and Mr Guppy (for it is he)
very lightly indeed. When they are shut into the back room, they
speak low.

T thought you had gone to Jericho at least instead of coming here,’
says Tony.

‘Why, I said about ten.’

‘You said about ten,’ Tony repeats. ‘Yes, so you did say about ten. But
according to my count, it's ten times ten--it's a hundred o'clock. I
never had such a night in my life!’

‘What has been the matter?’

That's it!’ says Tony. ‘Nothing has been the matter. But here have I
been stewing and fuming in this jolly old crib till I have had the
horrors falling on me as thick as hail. THERE'S a blessed- looking
candle!’ says Tony, pointing to the heavily burning taper on his table
with a great cabbage head and a long winding-sheet.

‘That's easily improved,’ Mr Guppy observes as he takes the snuffers
in hand.

IS it?’ returns his friend. ‘Not so easily as you think. It has been
smouldering like that ever since it was lighted.’

‘Why, what's the matter with you, Tony?’ inquires Mr Guppy, looking
at him, snuffers in hand, as he sits down with his elbow on the table.

‘William Guppy,’ replies the other, I am in the downs. It's this
unbearably dull, suicidal room--and old Boguey downstairs, I
suppose.’ Mr Weevle moodily pushes the snuffers-tray from him with
his elbow, leans his head on his hand, puts his feet on the fender, and
looks at the fire. Mr Guppy, observing him, slightly tosses his head
and sits down on the other side of the table in an easy attitude.

‘Wasn't that Snagsby talking to you, Tony?’

‘Yes, and he--yes, it was Snagsby,’ said Mr Weevle, altering the
construction of his sentence.
‘On business?’
‘No. No business. He was only sauntering by and stopped to prose.’

T thought it was Snagsby,’ says Mr Guppy, ‘and thought it as well that
he shouldn't see me, so I waited till he was gone.’

‘There we go again, William G.!’ cried Tony, looking up for an instant.
‘So mysterious and secret! By George, if we were going to commit a
murder, we couldn't have more mystery about it!’

Mr Guppy affects to smile, and with the view of changing the
conversation, looks with an admiration, real or pretended, round the
room at the Galaxy Gallery of British Beauty, terminating his survey
with the portrait of Lady Dedlock over the mantelshelf, in which she is
represented on a terrace, with a pedestal upon the terrace, and a vase
upon the pedestal, and her shawl upon the vase, and a prodigious
piece of fur upon the shawl, and her arm on the prodigious piece of
fur, and a bracelet on her arm.

‘That's very like Lady Dedlock,’ says Mr Guppy. It's a speaking
likeness.’

T wish it was,’ growls Tony, without changing his position. I should
have some fashionable conversation, here, then.’

Finding by this time that his friend is not to be wheedled into a more
sociable humour, Mr Guppy puts about upon the ill-used tack and
remonstrates with him.

‘Tony,’ says he, I can make allowances for lowness of spirits, for no
man knows what it is when it does come upon a man better than I do,
and no man perhaps has a better right to know it than a man who has
an unrequited image imprinted on his 'eart. But there are bounds to
these things when an unoffending party is in question, and I will
acknowledge to you, Tony, that I don't think your manner on the
present occasion is hospitable or quite gentlemanly.’

‘This is strong language, William Guppy,’ returns Mr Weevle.

‘Sir, it may be,’ retorts Mr William Guppy, ‘but I feel strongly when I
use it.’

Mr Weevle admits that he has been wrong and begs Mr William Guppy
to think no more about it. Mr William Guppy, however, having got the
advantage, cannot quite release it without a little more injured
remonstrance.
‘No! Dash it, Tony,’ says that gentleman, ‘you really ought to be
careful how you wound the feelings of a man who has an unrequited
image imprinted on his 'eart and who is NOT altogether happy in
those chords which vibrate to the tenderest emotions. You, Tony,
possess in yourself all that is calculated to charm the eye and allure
the taste. It is not--happily for you, perhaps, and I may wish that I
could say the same--it is not your character to hover around one
flower. The ole garden is open to you, and your airy pinions carry you
through it. Still, Tony, far be it from me, I am sure, to wound even
your feelings without a cause!’

Tony again entreats that the subject may be no longer pursued,
saying emphatically, ‘William Guppy, drop it!’ Mr Guppy acquiesces,
with the reply, I never should have taken it up, Tony, of my own
accord.’

‘And now,’ says Tony, stirring the fire, ‘touching this same bundle of
letters. Isn't it an extraordinary thing of Krook to have appointed
twelve o'clock to-night to hand 'em over to me?’

‘Very. What did he do it for?’

‘What does he do anything for? HE don't know. Said to-day was his
birthday and he'd hand 'em over to-night at twelve o'clock. He'll have
drunk himself blind by that time. He has been at it all day.’

‘He hasn't forgotten the appointment, I hope?’

‘Forgotten? Trust him for that. He never forgets anything. I saw him
to-night, about eight--helped him to shut up his shop--and he had got
the letters then in his hairy cap. He pulled it off and showed 'em me.
When the shop was closed, he took them out of his cap, hung his cap
on the chair-back, and stood turning them over before the fire. I heard
him a little while afterwards, through the floor here, humming like the
wind, the only song he knows-- about Bibo, and old Charon, and Bibo
being drunk when he died, or something or other. He has been as
quiet since as an old rat asleep in his hole.’

‘And you are to go down at twelve?’

‘At twelve. And as I tell you, when you came it seemed to me a
hundred.’

‘Tony,’ says Mr Guppy after considering a little with his legs crossed,
‘he can't read yet, can he?’

‘Read! He'll never read. He can make all the letters separately, and he
knows most of them separately when he sees them; he has got on that
much, under me; but he can't put them together. He's too old to
acquire the knack of it now--and too drunk.’

Tony,’ says Mr Guppy, uncrossing and recrossing his legs, ‘how do
you suppose he spelt out that name of Hawdon?’

‘He never spelt it out. You know what a curious power of eye he has
and how he has been used to employ himself in copying things by eye
alone. He imitated it, evidently from the direction of a letter, and
asked me what it meant.’

Tony,’ says Mr Guppy, uncrossing and recrossing his legs again,
‘should you say that the original was a man's writing or a woman's?’

‘A woman's. Fifty to one a lady's--slopes a good deal, and the end of
the letter 'n,' long and hasty.’

Mr Guppy has been biting his thumb-nail during this dialogue,
generally changing the thumb when he has changed the cross leg. As
he is going to do so again, he happens to look at his coat-sleeve. It
takes his attention. He stares at it, aghast.

‘Why, Tony, what on earth is going on in this house to-night? Is there
a chimney on fire?’

‘Chimney on fire!’
y

‘Ah!’ returns Mr Guppy. ‘See how the soot's falling. See here, on my
arm! See again, on the table here! Confound the stuff, it won't blow
off--smears like black fat!’

They look at one another, and Tony goes listening to the door, and a
little way upstairs, and a little way downstairs. Comes back and says
it's all right and all quiet, and quotes the remark he lately made to Mr
Snagsby about their cooking chops at the Sol's Arms.

‘And it was then,’ resumes Mr Guppy, still glancing with remarkable
aversion at the coat-sleeve, as they pursue their conversation before
the fire, leaning on opposite sides of the table, with their heads very
near together, ‘that he told you of his having taken the bundle of
letters from his lodger's portmanteau?’

‘That was the time, sir,’ answers Tony, faintly adjusting his whiskers.
‘Whereupon I wrote a line to my dear boy, the Honourable William
Guppy, informing him of the appointment for to-night and advising
him not to call before, Boguey being a slyboots.’
The light vivacious tone of fashionable life which is usually assumed
by Mr Weevle sits so ill upon him to-night that he abandons that and
his whiskers together, and after looking over his shoulder, appears to
yield himself up a prey to the horrors again.

‘You are to bring the letters to your room to read and compare, and to
get yourself into a position to tell him all about them. That's the
arrangement, isn't it, Tony?’ asks Mr Guppy, anxiously biting his
thumb-nail.

‘You can't speak too low. Yes. That's what he and I agreed.’
T tell you what, Tony--’

‘You can't speak too low,’ says Tony once more. Mr Guppy nods his
sagacious head, advances it yet closer, and drops into a whisper.

T tell you what. The first thing to be done is to make another packet
like the real one so that if he should ask to see the real one while it's
in my possession, you can show him the dummy.’

‘And suppose he detects the dummy as soon as he sees it, which with
his biting screw of an eye is about five hundred times more likely than
not,’ suggests Tony.

Then we'll face it out. They don't belong to him, and they never did.
You found that, and you placed them in my hands--a legal friend of
yours--for security. If he forces us to it, they'll be producible, won't
they?’

Ye-es,’ is Mr Weevle's reluctant admission.

‘Why, Tony,’ remonstrates his friend, ‘how you look! You don't doubt
William Guppy? You don't suspect any harm?’

T don't suspect anything more than I know, William,’ returns the other
gravely.

‘And what do you know?’ urges Mr Guppy, raising his voice a little;
but on his friend's once more warning him, ‘ tell you, you can't speak
too low,’ he repeats his question without any sound at all, forming
with his lips only the words, ‘What do you know?’

T know three things. First, I know that here we are whispering in
secrecy, a pair of conspirators.’
‘Well!’ says Mr Guppy. ‘And we had better be that than a pair of
noodles, which we should be if we were doing anything else, for it's the
only way of doing what we want to do. Secondly?’

‘Secondly, it's not made out to me how it's likely to be profitable, after
all.’

Mr Guppy casts up his eyes at the portrait of Lady Dedlock over the
mantelshelf and replies, ‘Tony, you are asked to leave that to the
honour of your friend. Besides its being calculated to serve that friend
in those chords of the human mind which--which need not be called
into agonizing vibration on the present occasion--your friend is no
fool. What's that?’

Tt's eleven o'clock striking by the bell of Saint Paul's. Listen and you'll
hear all the bells in the city jangling.’

Both sit silent, listening to the metal voices, near and distant,
resounding from towers of various heights, in tones more various than
their situations. When these at length cease, all seems more
mysterious and quiet than before. One disagreeable result of
whispering is that it seems to evoke an atmosphere of silence,
haunted by the ghosts of sound--strange cracks and tickings, the
rustling of garments that have no substance in them, and the tread of
dreadful feet that would leave no mark on the sea-sand or the winter
snow. So sensitive the two friends happen to be that the air is full of
these phantoms, and the two look over their shoulders by one consent
to see that the door is shut.

‘Yes, Tony?’ says Mr Guppy, drawing nearer to the fire and biting his
unsteady thumb-nail. ‘You were going to say, thirdly?’

It's far from a pleasant thing to be plotting about a dead man in the
room where he died, especially when you happen to live in it.’

‘But we are plotting nothing against him, Tony.’

‘May be not, still I don't like it. Live here by yourself and see how YOU
like it.’
‘As to dead men, Tony,’ proceeds Mr Guppy, evading this proposal,

‘there have been dead men in most rooms.’

T know there have, but in most rooms you let them alone, and--and
they let you alone,’ Tony answers.

The two look at each other again. Mr Guppy makes a hurried remark
to the effect that they may be doing the deceased a service, that he
hopes so. There is an oppressive blank until Mr Weevle, by stirring the
fire suddenly, makes Mr Guppy start as if his heart had been stirred
instead.

‘Fah! Here's more of this hateful soot hanging about,’ says he. ‘Let us
open the window a bit and get a mouthful of air. It's too close.’

He raises the sash, and they both rest on the window-sill, half in and
half out of the room. The neighbouring houses are too near to admit of
their seeing any sky without craning their necks and looking up, but
lights in frowsy windows here and there, and the rolling of distant
carriages, and the new expression that there is of the stir of men, they
find to be comfortable. Mr Guppy, noiselessly tapping on the window-
sill, resumes his whispering in quite a light-comedy tone.

‘By the by, Tony, don't forget old Smallweed,’ meaning the younger of
that name. T have not let him into this, you know. That grandfather of
his is too keen by half. It runs in the family.’

‘T remember,’ says Tony. ‘I am up to all that.’

‘And as to Krook,’ resumes Mr Guppy. ‘Now, do you suppose he really
has got hold of any other papers of importance, as he has boasted to
you, since you have been such allies?’

Tony shakes his head. ‘I don't know. Can't Imagine. If we get through
this business without rousing his suspicions, I shall be better
informed, no doubt. How can I know without seeing them, when he
don't know himself? He is always spelling out words from them, and
chalking them over the table and the shop-wall, and asking what this
is and what that is; but his whole stock from beginning to end may
easily be the waste-paper he bought it as, for anything I can say. It's a
monomania with him to think he is possessed of documents. He has
been going to learn to read them this last quarter of a century, I
should judge, from what he tells me.’

‘How did he first come by that idea, though? That's the question,’ Mr
Guppy suggests with one eye shut, after a little forensic meditation.
‘He may have found papers in something he bought, where papers
were not supposed to be, and may have got it into his shrewd head
from the manner and place of their concealment that they are worth
something.’

‘Or he may have been taken in, in some pretended bargain. Or he may
have been muddled altogether by long staring at whatever he HAS got,
and by drink, and by hanging about the Lord Chancellor's Court and
hearing of documents for ever,’ returns Mr Weevle.
Mr Guppy sitting on the window-sill, nodding his head and balancing
all these possibilities in his mind, continues thoughtfully to tap it, and
clasp it, and measure it with his hand, until he hastily draws his hand
away.

‘What, in the devil's name,’ he says, ‘is this! Look at my fingers!’

A thick, yellow liquor defiles them, which is offensive to the touch and
sight and more offensive to the smell. A stagnant, sickening oil with
some natural repulsion in it that makes them both shudder.

‘What have you been doing here? What have you been pouring out of
window?’

T pouring out of window! Nothing, I swear! Never, since I have been
here!’ cries the lodger.

And yet look here--and look here! When he brings the candle here,
from the corner of the window-sill, it slowly drips and creeps away
down the bricks, here lies in a little thick nauseous pool.

‘This is a horrible house,’ says Mr Guppy, shutting down the window.
‘Give me some water or I shall cut my hand off.’

He so washes, and rubs, and scrubs, and smells, and washes, that he
has not long restored himself with a glass of brandy and stood silently
before the fire when Saint Paul's bell strikes twelve and all those other
bells strike twelve from their towers of various heights in the dark air,
and in their many tones. When all is quiet again, the lodger says, ‘It's
the appointed time at last. Shall I go?’

Mr Guppy nods and gives him a ‘Tucky touch’ on the back, but not
with the washed hand, though it is his right hand.

He goes downstairs, and Mr Guppy tries to compose himself before the
fire for waiting a long time. But in no more than a minute or two the
stairs creak and Tony comes swiftly back.

‘Have you got them?’

‘Got them! No. The old man's not there.’

He has been so horribly frightened in the short interval that his terror

seizes the other, who makes a rush at him and asks loudly, ‘What's
the matter?’
T couldn't make him hear, and I softly opened the door and looked in.
And the burning smell is there--and the soot is there, and the oil is
there--and he is not there!’ Tony ends this with a groan.

Mr Guppy takes the light. They go down, more dead than alive, and
holding one another, push open the door of the back shop. The cat
has retreated close to it and stands snarling, not at them, at
something on the ground before the fire. There is a very little fire left
in the grate, but there is a smouldering, suffocating vapour in the
room and a dark, greasy coating on the walls and ceiling. The chairs
and table, and the bottle so rarely absent from the table, all stand as
usual. On one chair-back hang the old man's hairy cap and coat.

‘Look!’ whispers the lodger, pointing his friend's attention to these
objects with a trembling finger. IT told you so. When I saw him last, he
took his cap off, took out the little bundle of old letters, hung his cap
on the back of the chair--his coat was there already, for he had pulled
that off before he went to put the shutters up--and I left him turning
the letters over in his hand, standing just where that crumbled black
thing is upon the floor.’

Is he hanging somewhere? They look up. No.

‘See!’ whispers Tony. ‘At the foot of the same chair there lies a dirty bit
of thin red cord that they tie up pens with. That went round the
letters. He undid it slowly, leering and laughing at me, before he
began to turn them over, and threw it there. I saw it fall.’

‘What's the matter with the cat?’ says Mr Guppy. ‘Look at her!’
‘Mad, I think. And no wonder in this evil place.’

They advance slowly, looking at all these things. The cat remains
where they found her, still snarling at the something on the ground
before the fire and between the two chairs. What is it? Hold up the
light.

Here is a small burnt patch of flooring; here is the tinder from a little
bundle of burnt paper, but not so light as usual, seeming to be
steeped in something; and here is--is it the cinder of a small charred
and broken log of wood sprinkled with white ashes, or is it coal? Oh,
horror, he IS here! And this from which we run away, striking out the
light and overturning one another into the street, is all that represents
him.

Help, help, help! Come into this house for heaven's sake! Plenty will
come in, but none can help. The Lord Chancellor of that court, true to
his title in his last act, has died the death of all lord chancellors in all
courts and of all authorities in all places under all names soever,
where false pretences are made, and where injustice is done. Call the
death by any name your Highness will, attribute it to whom you will,
or say it might have been prevented how you will, it is the same death
eternally--inborn, inbred, engendered in the corrupted humours of the
vicious body itself, and that only--spontaneous combustion, and none
other of all the deaths that can be died.
Chapter XXXIII - Interlopers

Now do those two gentlemen not very neat about the cuffs and
buttons who attended the last coroner's inquest at the Sol's Arms
reappear in the precincts with surprising swiftness (being, in fact,
breathlessly fetched by the active and intelligent beadle), and institute
perquisitions through the court, and dive into the Sol's parlour, and
write with ravenous little pens on tissue-paper. Now do they note
down, in the watches of the night, how the neighbourhood of
Chancery Lane was yesterday, at about midnight, thrown into a state
of the most intense agitation and excitement by the following alarming
and horrible discovery. Now do they set forth how it will doubtless be
remembered that some time back a painful sensation was created in
the public mind by a case of mysterious death from opium occurring
in the first floor of the house occupied as a rag, bottle, and general
marine store shop, by an eccentric individual of intemperate habits,
far advanced in life, named Krook; and how, by a remarkable
coincidence, Krook was examined at the inquest, which it may be
recollected was held on that occasion at the Sol's Arms, a well-
conducted tavern immediately adjoining the premises in question on
the west side and licensed to a highly respectable landlord, Mr James
George Bogsby. Now do they show (in as many words as possible) how
during some hours of yesterday evening a very peculiar smell was
observed by the inhabitants of the court, in which the tragical
occurrence which forms the subject of that present account
transpired; and which odour was at one time so powerful that Mr
Swills, a comic vocalist professionally engaged by Mr J. G. Bogsby,
has himself stated to our reporter that he mentioned to Miss M.
Melvilleson, a lady of some pretensions to musical ability, likewise
engaged by Mr J. G. Bogsby to sing at a series of concerts called
Harmonic Assemblies, or Meetings, which it would appear are held at
the Sol's Arms under Mr Bogsby's direction pursuant to the Act of
George the Second, that he (Mr Swills) found his voice seriously
affected by the impure state of the atmosphere, his jocose expression
at the time being that he was like an empty post-office, for he hadn't a
single note in him. How this account of Mr Swills is entirely
corroborated by two intelligent married females residing in the same
court and known respectively by the names of Mrs Piper and Mrs
Perkins, both of whom observed the foetid effluvia and regarded them
as being emitted from the premises in the occupation of Krook, the
unfortunate deceased. All this and a great deal more the two
gentlemen who have formed an amicable partnership in the
melancholy catastrophe write down on the spot; and the boy
population of the court (out of bed in a moment) swarm up the
shutters of the Sol's Arms parlour, to behold the tops of their heads
while they are about it.
The whole court, adult as well as boy, is sleepless for that night, and
can do nothing but wrap up its many heads, and talk of the ill- fated
house, and look at it. Miss Flite has been bravely rescued from her
chamber, as if it were in flames, and accommodated with a bed at the
Sol's Arms. The Sol neither turns off its gas nor shuts its door all
night, for any kind of public excitement makes good for the Sol and
causes the court to stand in need of comfort. The house has not done
so much in the stomachic article of cloves or in brandy-and-water
warm since the inquest. The moment the pot-boy heard what had
happened, he rolled up his shirt-sleeves tight to his shoulders and
said, ‘There'll be a run upon us!’ In the first outcry, young Piper
dashed off for the fire-engines and returned in triumph at a jolting
gallop perched up aloft on the Phoenix and holding on to that
fabulous creature with all his might in the midst of helmets and
torches. One helmet remains behind after careful investigation of all
chinks and crannies and slowly paces up and down before the house
in company with one of the two policemen who have likewise been left
in charge thereof. To this trio everybody in the court possessed of
sixpence has an insatiate desire to exhibit hospitality in a liquid form.

Mr Weevle and his friend Mr Guppy are within the bar at the Sol and
are worth anything to the Sol that the bar contains if they will only
stay there. ‘This is not a time,’ says Mr Bogsby, ‘to haggle about
money,’ though he looks something sharply after it, over the counter;
‘give your orders, you two gentlemen, and you're welcome to whatever
you put a name to.’

Thus entreated, the two gentlemen (Mr Weevle especially) put names
to so many things that in course of time they find it difficult to put a
name to anything quite distinctly, though they still relate to all new-
comers some version of the night they have had of it, and of what they
said, and what they thought, and what they saw. Meanwhile, one or
other of the policemen often flits about the door, and pushing it open
a little way at the full length of his arm, looks in from outer gloom. Not
that he has any suspicions, but that he may as well know what they
are up to in there.

Thus night pursues its leaden course, finding the court still out of bed
through the unwonted hours, still treating and being treated, still
conducting itself similarly to a court that has had a little money left it
unexpectedly. Thus night at length with slow-retreating steps departs,
and the lamp-lighter going his rounds, like an executioner to a
despotic king, strikes off the little heads of fire that have aspired to
lessen the darkness. Thus the day cometh, whether or no.

And the day may discern, even with its dim London eye, that the court
has been up all night. Over and above the faces that have fallen
drowsily on tables and the heels that lie prone on hard floors instead
of beds, the brick and mortar physiognomy of the very court itself
looks worn and jaded. And now the neighbourhood, waking up and
beginning to hear of what has happened, comes streaming in, half
dressed, to ask questions; and the two policemen and the helmet (who
are far less impressible externally than the court) have enough to do
to keep the door.

‘Good gracious, gentlemen!’ says Mr Snagsby, coming up. ‘What's this
I hear!’

‘Why, it's true,’ returns one of the policemen. ‘That's what it is. Now
move on here, come!’

‘Why, good gracious, gentlemen,’ says Mr Snagsby, somewhat
promptly backed away, I was at this door last night betwixt ten and
eleven o'clock in conversation with the young man who lodges here.’

‘Indeed?’ returns the policeman. ‘You will find the young man next
door then. Now move on here, some of you,’

‘Not hurt, I hope?’ says Mr Snagsby.
‘Hurt? No. What's to hurt him!’

Mr Snagsby, wholly unable to answer this or any question in his
troubled mind, repairs to the Sol's Arms and finds Mr Weevle
languishing over tea and toast with a considerable expression on him
of exhausted excitement and exhausted tobacco-smoke.

‘And Mr Guppy likewise!’ quoth Mr Snagsby. ‘Dear, dear, dear! What a
fate there seems in all this! And my lit--’

Mr Snagsby's power of speech deserts him in the formation of the
words ‘my little woman.’ For to see that injured female walk into the
Sol's Arms at that hour of the morning and stand before the beer-
engine, with her eyes fixed upon him like an accusing spirit, strikes
him dumb.

‘My dear,’ says Mr Snagsby when his tongue is loosened, ‘will you take
anything? A little--not to put too fine a point upon it--drop of shrub?’

‘No,’ says Mrs Snagsby.
‘My love, you know these two gentlemen?’

Yes!’ says Mrs Snagsby, and in a rigid manner acknowledges their
presence, still fixing Mr Snagsby with her eye.
The devoted Mr Snagsby cannot bear this treatment. He takes Mrs
Snagsby by the hand and leads her aside to an adjacent cask.

‘My little woman, why do you look at me in that way? Pray don't do it.’
T can't help my looks,’ says Mrs Snagsby, ‘and if I could I wouldn't.’

Mr Snagsby, with his cough of meekness, rejoins, ‘Wouldn't you really,
my dear?’ and meditates. Then coughs his cough of trouble and says,
‘This is a dreadful mystery, my love!’ still fearfully disconcerted by Mrs
Snagsby's eye.

It IS,’ returns Mrs Snagsby, shaking her head, ‘a dreadful mystery.’

‘My little woman,’ urges Mr Snagsby in a piteous manner, ‘don't for
goodness' sake speak to me with that bitter expression and look at me
in that searching way! I beg and entreat of you not to do it. Good Lord,
you don't suppose that I would go spontaneously combusting any
person, my dear?’

T can't say,’ returns Mrs Snagsby.

On a hasty review of his unfortunate position, Mr Snagsby ‘can't say’
either. He is not prepared positively to deny that he may have had
something to do with it. He has had something--he don't know what--
to do with so much in this connexion that is mysterious that it is
possible he may even be implicated, without knowing it, in the present
transaction. He faintly wipes his forehead with his handkerchief and

gasps.
‘My life,’ says the unhappy stationer, ‘would you have any objections
to mention why, being in general so delicately circumspect in your
conduct, you come into a wine-vaults before breakfast?’

‘Why do YOU come here?’ inquires Mrs Snagsby.

‘My dear, merely to know the rights of the fatal accident which has
happened to the venerable party who has been--combusted.’ Mr
Snagsby has made a pause to suppress a groan. I should then have
related them to you, my love, over your French roll.’

‘T dare say you would! You relate everything to me, Mr Snagsby.’

‘Every--my lit--’

T should be glad,’ says Mrs Snagsby after contemplating his increased
confusion with a severe and sinister smile, if you would come home
with me; I think you may be safer there, Mr Snagsby, than anywhere
else.’

‘My love, I don't know but what I may be, I am sure. I am ready to go.’

Mr Snagsby casts his eye forlornly round the bar, gives Messrs.
Weevle and Guppy good morning, assures them of the satisfaction
with which he sees them uninjured, and accompanies Mrs Snagsby
from the Sol's Arms. Before night his doubt whether he may not be
responsible for some inconceivable part in the catastrophe which is
the talk of the whole neighbourhood is almost resolved into certainty
by Mrs Snagsby's pertinacity in that fixed gaze. His mental sufferings
are so great that he entertains wandering ideas of delivering himself
up to justice and requiring to be cleared if innocent and punished
with the utmost rigour of the law if guilty.

Mr Weevle and Mr Guppy, having taken their breakfast, step into
Lincoln's Inn to take a little walk about the square and clear as many
of the dark cobwebs out of their brains as a little walk may.

‘There can be no more favourable time than the present, Tony,’ says
Mr Guppy after they have broodingly made out the four sides of the
square, ‘for a word or two between us upon a point on which we must,
with very little delay, come to an understanding.’

‘Now, I tell you what, William G.!’ returns the other, eyeing his
companion with a bloodshot eye. ‘If it's a point of conspiracy, you
needn't take the trouble to mention it. I have had enough of that, and
I ain't going to have any more. We shall have YOU taking fire next or
blowing up with a bang.’

This supposititious phenomenon is so very disagreeable to Mr Guppy
that his voice quakes as he says in a moral way, ‘Tony, I should have
thought that what we went through last night would have been a
lesson to you never to be personal any more as long as you lived.’ To
which Mr Weevle returns, ‘William, I should have thought it would
have been a lesson to YOU never to conspire any more as long as you
lived.’ To which Mr Guppy says, ‘Who's conspiring?’ To which Mr
Jobling replies, ‘Why, YOU are!’ To which Mr Guppy retorts, ‘No, I am
not.’ To which Mr Jobling retorts again, ‘Yes, you are!’ To which Mr
Guppy retorts, ‘Who says so?’ To which Mr Jobling retorts, I say so!’
To which Mr Guppy retorts, ‘Oh, indeed?’ To which Mr Jobling retorts,
‘Yes, indeed!’ And both being now in a heated state, they walk on
silently for a while to cool down again.

‘Tony,’ says Mr Guppy then, ‘if you heard your friend out instead of
flying at him, you wouldn't fall into mistakes. But your temper is
hasty and you are not considerate. Possessing in yourself, Tony, all
that is calculated to charm the eye--’

‘Oh! Blow the eye!’ cries Mr Weevle, cutting him short. ‘Say what you
have got to say!’

Finding his friend in this morose and material condition, Mr Guppy
only expresses the finer feelings of his soul through the tone of injury
in which he recommences, ‘Tony, when I say there is a point on which
we must come to an understanding pretty soon, I say so quite apart
from any kind of conspiring, however innocent. You know it is
professionally arranged beforehand in all cases that are tried what
facts the witnesses are to prove. Is it or is it not desirable that we
should know what facts we are to prove on the inquiry into the death
of this unfortunate old mo--gentleman?’ (Mr Guppy was going to say
‘mogul,’ but thinks ‘gentleman’ better suited to the circumstances.)

‘What facts? THE facts.’

‘The facts bearing on that inquiry. Those are’--Mr Guppy tells them off
on his fingers--’;what we knew of his habits, when you saw him last,
what his condition was then, the discovery that we made, and how we
made it.’

‘Yes,’ says Mr Weevle. ‘Those are about the facts.’

‘We made the discovery in consequence of his having, in his eccentric
way, an appointment with you at twelve o'clock at night, when you
were to explain some writing to him as you had often done before on
account of his not being able to read. I, spending the evening with
you, was called down--and so forth. The inquiry being only into the
circumstances touching the death of the deceased, it's not necessary
to go beyond these facts, I suppose you'll agree?’

‘No!’ returns Mr Weevle. suppose not.’
‘And this is not a conspiracy, perhaps?’ says the injured Guppy.

‘No,’ returns his friend; ‘if it's nothing worse than this, I withdraw the
observation.’

‘Now, Tony,’ says Mr Guppy, taking his arm again and walking him
slowly on, I should like to know, in a friendly way, whether you have
yet thought over the many advantages of your continuing to live at
that place?’

‘What do you mean?’ says Tony, stopping.
‘Whether you have yet thought over the many advantages of your
continuing to live at that place?’ repeats Mr Guppy, walking him on
again.

‘At what place? THAT place?’ pointing in the direction of the rag and
bottle shop. Mr Guppy nods.

‘Why, I wouldn't pass another night there for any consideration that
you could offer me,’ says Mr Weevle, haggardly staring.

‘Do you mean it though, Tony?’

‘Mean it! Do I look as if I mean it? I feel as if I do; I know that,’ says Mr
Weevle with a very genuine shudder.

‘Then the possibility or probability--for such it must be considered--of
your never being disturbed in possession of those effects lately
belonging to a lone old man who seemed to have no relation in the
world, and the certainty of your being able to find out what he really
had got stored up there, don't weigh with you at all against last night,
Tony, if I understand you?’ says Mr Guppy, biting his thumb with the
appetite of vexation.

‘Certainly not. Talk in that cool way of a fellow's living there?’ cries Mr
Weevle indignantly. ‘Go and live there yourself.’

‘Oh! I, Tony!’ says Mr Guppy, soothing him. T have never lived there
and couldn't get a lodging there now, whereas you have got one.’

‘You are welcome to it,’ rejoins his friend, ‘and--ugh!--you may make
yourself at home in it.’

‘Then you really and truly at this point,’ says Mr Guppy, ‘give up the
whole thing, if I understand you, Tony?’

‘You never,’ returns Tony with a most convincing steadfastness, ‘said
a truer word in all your life. I do!’

While they are so conversing, a hackney-coach drives into the square,
on the box of which vehicle a very tall hat makes itself manifest to the
public. Inside the coach, and consequently not so manifest to the
multitude, though sufficiently so to the two friends, for the coach
stops almost at their feet, are the venerable Mr Smallweed and Mrs
Smallweed, accompanied by their granddaughter Judy.

An air of haste and excitement pervades the party, and as the tall hat
(surmounting Mr Smallweed the younger) alights, Mr Smallweed the
elder pokes his head out of window and bawls to Mr Guppy, ‘How de
do, sir! How de do!’

‘What do Chick and his family want here at this time of the morning, I
wonder!’ says Mr Guppy, nodding to his familiar.

‘My dear sir,’ cries Grandfather Smallweed, ‘would you do me a
favour? Would you and your friend be so very obleeging as to carry me
into the public-house in the court, while Bart and his sister bring
their grandmother along? Would you do an old man that good turn,
sir?’

Mr Guppy looks at his friend, repeating inquiringly, ‘The public- house
in the court?’ And they prepare to bear the venerable burden to the
Sol's Arms.

‘There's your fare!’ says the patriarch to the coachman with a fierce
grin and shaking his incapable fist at him. ‘Ask me for a penny more,
and I'll have my lawful revenge upon you. My dear young men, be easy
with me, if you please. Allow me to catch you round the neck. I won't
squeeze you tighter than I can help. Oh, Lord! Oh, dear me! Oh, my
bones!’

It is well that the Sol is not far off, for Mr Weevle presents an
apoplectic appearance before half the distance is accomplished. With
no worse aggravation of his symptoms, however, than the utterance of
divers croaking sounds expressive of obstructed respiration, he fulils
his share of the porterage and the benevolent old gentleman is
deposited by his own desire in the parlour of the Sol's Arms.

‘Oh, Lord!’ gasps Mr Smallweed, looking about him, breathless, from
an arm-chair. ‘Oh, dear me! Oh, my bones and back! Oh, my aches
and pains! Sit down, you dancing, prancing, shambling, scrambling
poll-parrot! Sit down!’

This little apostrophe to Mrs Smallweed is occasioned by a propensity
on the part of that unlucky old lady whenever she finds herself on her
feet to amble about and ‘set’ to inanimate objects, accompanying
herself with a chattering noise, as in a witch dance. A nervous
affection has probably as much to do with these demonstrations as
any imbecile intention in the poor old woman, but on the present
occasion they are so particularly lively in connexion with the Windsor
arm-chair, fellow to that in which Mr Smallweed is seated, that she
only quite desists when her grandchildren have held her down in it,
her lord in the meanwhile bestowing upon her, with great volubility,
the endearing epithet of ‘a pig-headed jackdaw,’ repeated a surprising
number of times.
‘My dear sir,’ Grandfather Smallweed then proceeds, addressing Mr
Guppy, ‘there has been a calamity here. Have you heard of it, either of
you?’

‘Heard of it, sir! Why, we discovered it.’
‘You discovered it. You two discovered it! Bart, THEY discovered it!’

The two discoverers stare at the Smallweeds, who return the
compliment.

‘My dear friends,’ whines Grandfather Smallweed, putting out both his
hands, IT owe you a thousand thanks for discharging the melancholy
office of discovering the ashes of Mrs Smallweed's brother.’

‘Eh?’ says Mr Guppy.

‘Mrs Smallweed's brother, my dear friend--her only relation. We were
not on terms, which is to be deplored now, but he never WOULD be on
terms. He was not fond of us. He was eccentric--he was very eccentric.
Unless he has left a will (which is not at all likely) I shall take out
letters of administration. I have come down to look after the property;
it must be sealed up, it must be protected. I have come down,’ repeats
Grandfather Smallweed, hooking the air towards him with all his ten
fingers at once, ‘to look after the property.’

T think, Small,’ says the disconsolate Mr Guppy, ‘you might have
mentioned that the old man was your uncle.’

‘You two were so close about him that I thought you would like me to
be the same,’ returns that old bird with a secretly glistening eye.
‘Besides, I wasn't proud of him.’

‘Besides which, it was nothing to you, you know, whether he was or
not,’ says Judy. Also with a secretly glistening eye.

‘He never saw me in his life to know me,’ observed Small; IT don't know
why I should introduce HIM, I am sure!’

‘No, he never communicated with us, which is to be deplored,’ the old
gentleman strikes in, ‘but I have come to look after the property--to
look over the papers, and to look after the property. We shall make
good our title. It is in the hands of my solicitor. Mr Tulkinghorn, of
Lincoln's Inn Fields, over the way there, is so good as to act as my
solicitor; and grass don't grow under HIS feet, I can tell ye. Krook was
Mrs Smallweed's only brother; she had no relation but Krook, and
Krook had no relation but Mrs Smallweed. I am speaking of your
brother, you brimstone black- beetle, that was seventy-six years of

?

age.

Mrs Smallweed instantly begins to shake her head and pipe up,
‘Seventy-six pound seven and sevenpence! Seventy-six thousand bags
of money! Seventy-six hundred thousand million of parcels of bank-
notes!’

‘Will somebody give me a quart pot?’ exclaims her exasperated
husband, looking helplessly about him and finding no missile within
his reach. ‘Will somebody obleege me with a spittoon? Will somebody
hand me anything hard and bruising to pelt at her? You hag, you cat,
you dog, you brimstone barker!’ Here Mr Smallweed, wrought up to
the highest pitch by his own eloquence, actually throws Judy at her
grandmother in default of anything else, by butting that young virgin
at the old lady with such force as he can muster and then dropping
into his chair in a heap.

‘Shake me up, somebody, if you'll be so good,’ says the voice from
within the faintly struggling bundle into which he has collapsed. 1
have come to look after the property. Shake me up, and call in the
police on duty at the next house to be explained to about the property.
My solicitor will be here presently to protect the property.
Transportation or the gallows for anybody who shall touch the
property!’ As his dutiful grandchildren set him up, panting, and
putting him through the usual restorative process of shaking and
punching, he still repeats like an echo, ‘The--the property! The
property! Property!’

Mr Weevle and Mr Guppy look at each other, the former as having
relinquished the whole affair, the latter with a discomfited
countenance as having entertained some lingering expectations yet.
But there is nothing to be done in opposition to the Smallweed
interest. Mr Tulkinghorn's clerk comes down from his official pew in
the chambers to mention to the police that Mr Tulkinghorn is
answerable for its being all correct about the next of kin and that the
papers and effects will be formally taken possession of in due time
and course. Mr Smallweed is at once permitted so far to assert his
supremacy as to be carried on a visit of sentiment into the next house
and upstairs into Miss Flite's deserted room, where he looks like a
hideous bird of prey newly added to her aviary.

The arrival of this unexpected heir soon taking wind in the court still
makes good for the Sol and keeps the court upon its mettle. Mrs Piper
and Mrs Perkins think it hard upon the young man if there really is no
will, and consider that a handsome present ought to be made him out
of the estate. Young Piper and young Perkins, as members of that
restless juvenile circle which is the terror of the foot-passengers in
Chancery Lane, crumble into ashes behind the pump and under the
archway all day long, where wild yells and hootings take place over
their remains. Little Swills and Miss M. Melvilleson enter into affable
conversation with their patrons, feeling that these unusual
occurrences level the barriers between professionals and non-
professionals. Mr Bogsby puts up The popular song of King Death,
with chorus by the whole strength of the company,’ as the great
Harmonic feature of the week and announces in the bill that UU. G. B.
is induced to do so at a considerable extra expense in consequence of
a wish which has been very generally expressed at the bar by a large
body of respectable individuals and in homage to a late melancholy
event which has aroused so much sensation.’ There is one point
connected with the deceased upon which the court is particularly
anxious, namely, that the fiction of a full-sized coffin should be
preserved, though there is so little to put in it. Upon the undertaker's
stating in the Sol's bar in the course of the day that he has received
orders to construct ‘a six-footer,’ the general solicitude is much
relieved, and it is considered that Mr Smallweed's conduct does him
great honour.

Out of the court, and a long way out of it, there is considerable
excitement too, for men of science and philosophy come to look, and
carriages set down doctors at the corner who arrive with the same
intent, and there is more learned talk about inflammable gases and
phosphuretted hydrogen than the court has ever imagined. Some of
these authorities (of course the wisest) hold with indignation that the
deceased had no business to die in the alleged manner; and being
reminded by other authorities of a certain inquiry into the evidence for
such deaths reprinted in the sixth volume of the Philosophical
Transactions; and also of a book not quite unknown on English
medical jurisprudence; and likewise of the Italian case of the Countess
Cornelia Baudi as set forth in detail by one Bianchini, prebendary of
Verona, who wrote a scholarly work or so and was occasionally heard
of in his time as having gleams of reason in him; and also of the
testimony of Messrs. Fodere and Mere, two pestilent Frenchmen who
WOULD investigate the subject; and further, of the corroborative
testimony of Monsieur Le Cat, a rather celebrated French surgeon
once upon a time, who had the unpoliteness to live in a house where
such a case occurred and even to write an account of it--still they
regard the late Mr Krook's obstinacy in going out of the world by any
such by-way as wholly unjustifiable and personally offensive. The less
the court understands of all this, the more the court likes it, and the
greater enjoyment it has in the stock in trade of the Sol's Arms. Then
there comes the artist of a picture newspaper, with a foreground and
figures ready drawn for anything from a wreck on the Cornish coast to
a review in Hyde Park or a meeting in Manchester, and in Mrs Perkins'
own room, memorable evermore, he then and there throws in upon
the block Mr Krook's house, as large as life; in fact, considerably
larger, making a very temple of it. Similarly, being permitted to look in
at the door of the fatal chamber, he depicts that apartment as three-
quarters of a mile long by fifty yards high, at which the court is
particularly charmed. All this time the two gentlemen before
mentioned pop in and out of every house and assist at the
philosophical disputations--go everywhere and listen to everybody--
and yet are always diving into the Sol's parlour and writing with the
ravenous little pens on the tissue-paper.

At last come the coroner and his inquiry, like as before, except that
the coroner cherishes this case as being out of the common way and
tells the gentlemen of the jury, in his private capacity, that ‘that would
seem to be an unlucky house next door, gentlemen, a destined house;
but so we sometimes find it, and these are mysteries we can't account
for!’ After which the six-footer comes into action and is much admired.

In all these proceedings Mr Guppy has so slight a part, except when
he gives his evidence, that he is moved on like a private individual and
can only haunt the secret house on the outside, where he has the
mortification of seeing Mr Smallweed padlocking the door, and of
bitterly knowing himself to be shut out. But before these proceedings
draw to a close, that is to say, on the night next after the catastrophe,
Mr Guppy has a thing to say that must be said to Lady Dedlock.

For which reason, with a sinking heart and with that hang-dog sense
of guilt upon him which dread and watching enfolded in the Sol's
Arms have produced, the young man of the name of Guppy presents
himself at the town mansion at about seven o'clock in the evening and
requests to see her ladyship. Mercury replies that she is going out to
dinner; don't he see the carriage at the door? Yes, he does see the
carriage at the door; but he wants to see my Lady too.

Mercury is disposed, as he will presently declare to a _ fellow-
gentleman in waiting, ‘to pitch into the young man’; but his
instructions are positive. Therefore he sulkily supposes that the young
man must come up into the library. There he leaves the young man in
a large room, not over-light, while he makes report of him.

Mr Guppy looks into the shade in all directions, discovering
everywhere a certain charred and whitened little heap of coal or wood.
Presently he hears a rustling. Is it--? No, it's no ghost, but fair flesh
and blood, most brilliantly dressed.

T have to beg your ladyship's pardon,’ Mr Guppy stammers, very
downcast. This is an inconvenient time--’

T told you, you could come at any time.’ She takes a chair, looking
straight at him as on the last occasion.
‘Thank your ladyship. Your ladyship is very affable.’

‘You can sit down.’ There is not much affability in her tone.

T don't know, your ladyship, that it's worth while my sitting down and
detaining you, for I--I have not got the letters that I mentioned when I
had the honour of waiting on your ladyship.’

‘Have you come merely to say so?’

‘Merely to say so, your ladyship.’ Mr Guppy besides being depressed,
disappointed, and uneasy, is put at a further disadvantage by the
splendour and beauty of her appearance.

She knows its influence perfectly, has studied it too well to miss a
grain of its effect on any one. As she looks at him so steadily and
coldly, he not only feels conscious that he has no guide in the least
perception of what is really the complexion of her thoughts, but also
that he is being every moment, as it were, removed further and further
from her.

She will not speak, it is plain. So he must.

In short, your ladyship,’ says Mr Guppy like a meanly penitent thief,
‘the person I was to have had the letters of, has come to a sudden end,
and--’ He stops. Lady Dedlock calmly finishes the sentence.

‘And the letters are destroyed with the person?’

Mr Guppy would say no if he could--as he is unable to hide.

T believe so, your ladyship.’

If he could see the least sparkle of relief in her face now? No, he could
see no such thing, even if that brave outside did not utterly put him
away, and he were not looking beyond it and about it.

He falters an awkward excuse or two for his failure.

Is this all you have to say?’ inquires Lady Dedlock, having heard him
out--or as nearly out as he can stumble.

Mr Guppy thinks that's all.

‘You had better be sure that you wish to say nothing more to me, this
being the last time you will have the opportunity.’
Mr Guppy is quite sure. And indeed he has no such wish at present,
by any means.

‘That is enough. I will dispense with excuses. Good evening to you!’
And she rings for Mercury to show the young man of the name of
Guppy out.

But in that house, in that same moment, there happens to be an old
man of the name of Tulkinghorn. And that old man, coming with his
quiet footstep to the library, has his hand at that moment on the
handle of the door--comes in--and comes face to face with the young
man as he is leaving the room.

One glance between the old man and the lady, and for an instant the
blind that is always down flies up. Suspicion, eager and sharp, looks
out. Another instant, close again.

T beg your pardon, Lady Dedlock. I beg your pardon a thousand
times. It is so very unusual to find you here at this hour. I supposed
the room was empty. I beg your pardon!’

‘Stay!’ She negligently calls him back. ‘Remain here, I beg. I am going
out to dinner. I have nothing more to say to this young man!’

The disconcerted young man bows, as he goes out, and cringingly
hopes that Mr Tulkinghorn of the Fields is well.

‘Aye, aye?’ says the lawyer, looking at him from under his bent brows,
though he has no need to look again--not he. ‘From Kenge and
Carboy's, surely?’

‘Kenge and Carboy's, Mr Tulkinghorn. Name of Guppy, sir.’

‘To be sure. Why, thank you, Mr Guppy, I am very well!’

‘Happy to hear it, sir. You can't be too well, sir, for the credit of the
profession.’

‘Thank you, Mr Guppy!’

Mr Guppy sneaks away. Mr Tulkinghorn, such a foil in his old-
fashioned rusty black to Lady Dedlock's brightness, hands her down
the staircase to her carriage. He returns rubbing his chin, and rubs it
a good deal in the course of the evening.
Chapter XXXIV - A Turn of the Screw

‘Now, what,’ says Mr George, ‘may this be? Is it blank cartridge or
ball? A flash in the pan or a shot?’

An open letter is the subject of the trooper's speculations, and it
seems to perplex him mightily. He looks at it at arm's length, brings it
close to him, holds it in his right hand, holds it in his left hand, reads
it with his head on this side, with his head on that side, contracts his
eyebrows, elevates them, still cannot satisfy himself. He smooths it
out upon the table with his heavy palm, and thoughtfully walking up
and down the gallery, makes a halt before it every now and then to
come upon it with a fresh eye. Even that won't do. ‘Is it,’ Mr George
still muses, ‘blank cartridge or ball?’

Phil Squod, with the aid of a brush and paint-pot, is employed in the
distance whitening the targets, softly whistling in quick-march time
and in drum-and-fife manner that he must and will go back again to
the girl he left behind him.

‘Phil!’ The trooper beckons as he calls him.

Phil approaches in his usual way, sidling off at first as if he were going
anywhere else and then bearing down upon his commander like a
bayonet-charge. Certain splashes of white show in high relief upon his
dirty face, and he scrapes his one eyebrow with the handle of the
brush.

‘Attention, Phil! Listen to this.’
‘Steady, commander, steady.’

“Sir. Allow me to remind you (though there is no legal necessity for my
doing so, as you are aware) that the bill at two months' date drawn on
yourself by Mr Matthew Bagnet, and by you accepted, for the sum of
ninety-seven pounds four shillings and ninepence, will become due to-
morrow, when you will please be prepared to take up the same on
presentation. Yours, Joshua Smallweed.' What do you make of that,
Phil?’

‘Mischief, guv'ner.’
‘Why?’
T think,’ replies Phil after pensively tracing out a cross-wrinkle in his

forehead with the brush-handle, ‘that mischeevious consequences is
always meant when money's asked for.’
‘Lookye, Phil,’ says the trooper, sitting on the table. ‘First and last, I
have paid, I may say, half as much again as this principal in interest
and one thing and another.’

Phil intimates by sidling back a pace or two, with a _ very
unaccountable wrench of his wry face, that he does not regard the
transaction as being made more promising by this incident.

‘And lookye further, Phil,’ says the trooper, staying his premature
conclusions with a wave of his hand. There has always been an
understanding that this bill was to be what they call renewed. And it
has been renewed no end of times. What do you say now?’

T say that I think the times is come to a end at last.’

‘You do? Humph! I am much of the same mind myself.’

Joshua Smallweed is him that was brought here in a chair?’

‘The same.’

‘Guv'ner,’ says Phil with exceeding gravity, ‘he's a leech in his
dispositions, he's a screw and a wice in his actions, a snake in his
twistings, and a lobster in his claws.’

Having thus expressively uttered his sentiments, Mr Squod, after
waiting a little to ascertain if any further remark be expected of him,
gets back by his usual series of movements to the target he has in
hand and vigorously signifies through his former musical medium
that he must and he will return to that ideal young lady. George,
having folded the letter, walks in that direction.

‘There IS a way, commander,’ says Phil, looking cunningly at him, ‘of
settling this.’

‘Paying the money, I suppose? I wish I could.’

Phil shakes his head. ‘No, guv'ner, no; not so bad as that. There IS a
way,’ says Phil with a highly artistic turn of his brush; ‘what I'm a-
doing at present.’

‘Whitewashing.’

Phil nods.

‘A pretty way that would be! Do you know what would become of the
Bagnets in that case? Do you know they would be ruined to pay off my
old scores? YOU'RE a moral character,’ says the trooper, eyeing him in
his large way with no small indignation; ‘upon my life you are, Phil!’

Phil, on one knee at the target, is in course of protesting earnestly,
though not without many allegorical scoops of his brush and
smoothings of the white surface round the rim with his thumb, that
he had forgotten the Bagnet responsibility and would not so much as
injure a hair of the head of any member of that worthy family when
steps are audible in the long passage without, and a cheerful voice is
heard to wonder whether George is at home. Phil, with a look at his
master, hobbles up, saying, ‘Here's the guv'ner, Mrs Bagnet! Here he
is!’ and the old girl herself, accompanied by Mr Bagnet, appears.

The old girl never appears in walking trim, in any season of the year,
without a grey cloth cloak, coarse and much worn but very clean,
which is, undoubtedly, the identical garment rendered so interesting
to Mr Bagnet by having made its way home to Europe from another
quarter of the globe in company with Mrs Bagnet and an umbrella.
The latter faithful appendage is also invariably a part of the old girl's
presence out of doors. It is of no colour known in this life and has a
corrugated wooden crook for a handle, with a metallic object let into
its prow, or beak, resembling a little model of a fanlight over a street
door or one of the oval glasses out of a pair of spectacles, which
ornamental object has not that tenacious capacity of sticking to its
post that might be desired in an article long associated with the
British army. The old girl's umbrella is of a flabby habit of waist and
seems to be in need of stays--an appearance that is possibly referable
to its having served through a series of years at home as a cupboard
and on journeys as a carpet bag. She never puts it up, having the
greatest reliance on her well-proved cloak with its capacious hood, but
generally uses the instrument as a wand with which to point out
joints of meat or bunches of greens in marketing or to arrest the
attention of tradesmen by a friendly poke. Without her market-
basket, which is a sort of wicker well with two flapping lids, she never
stirs abroad. Attended by these her trusty companions, therefore, her
honest sunburnt face looking cheerily out of a rough straw bonnet,
Mrs Bagnet now arrives, fresh-coloured and bright, in George's
Shooting Gallery.

‘Well, George, old fellow,’ says she, ‘and how do YOU do, this sunshiny
morning?’

Giving him a friendly shake of the hand, Mrs Bagnet draws a long
breath after her walk and sits down to enjoy a rest. Having a faculty,
matured on the tops of baggage-waggons and in other such positions,
of resting easily anywhere, she perches on a rough bench, unties her
bonnet-strings, pushes back her bonnet, crosses her arms, and looks
perfectly comfortable.
Mr Bagnet in the meantime has shaken hands with his old comrade
and with Phil, on whom Mrs Bagnet likewise bestows a_ good-
humoured nod and smile.

‘Now, George,’ said Mrs Bagnet briskly, ‘here we are, Lignum and
myself--she often speaks of her husband by this appellation, on
account, as it is supposed, of Lignum Vitae having been his old
regimental nickname when they first became acquainted, in
compliment to the extreme hardness and toughness of his
physiognomy--’just looked in, we have, to make it all correct as usual
about that security. Give him the new bill to sign, George, and he'll
sign it like a man.’

T was coming to you this morning,’ observes the trooper reluctantly.

‘Yes, we thought you'd come to us this morning, but we turned out
early and left Woolwich, the best of boys, to mind his sisters and came
to you instead--as you see! For Lignum, he's tied so close now, and
gets so little exercise, that a walk does him good. But what's the
matter, George?’ asks Mrs Bagnet, stopping in her cheerful talk. ‘You
don't look yourself.’

T am not quite myself,’ returns the trooper; ‘I have been a little put
out, Mrs Bagnet.’

Her bright quick eye catches the truth directly. ‘George!’ holding up
her forefinger. ‘Don't tell me there's anything wrong about that
security of Lignum's! Don't do it, George, on account of the children!’

The trooper looks at her with a troubled visage.

‘George,’ says Mrs Bagnet, using both her arms for emphasis and
occasionally bringing down her open hands upon her knees. Tf you
have allowed anything wrong to come to that security of Lignum's, and
if you have let him in for it, and if you have put us in danger of being
sold up--and I see sold up in your face, George, as plain as print--you
have done a shameful action and have deceived us cruelly. I tell you,
cruelly, George. There!’

Mr Bagnet, otherwise as immovable as a pump or a lamp-post, puts
his large right hand on the top of his bald head as if to defend it from
a shower-bath and looks with great uneasiness at Mrs Bagnet.

‘George,’ says that old girl, I wonder at you! George, Iam ashamed of
you! George, I couldn't have believed you would have done it! I always
knew you to be a rolling stone that gathered no moss, but I never
thought you would have taken away what little moss there was for
Bagnet and the children to lie upon. You know what a hard-working,
steady-going chap he is. You know what Quebec and Malta and
Woolwich are, and I never did think you would, or could, have had the
heart to serve us so. Oh, George!’ Mrs Bagnet gathers up her cloak to
wipe her eyes on in a very genuine manner, ‘How could you do it?’

Mrs Bagnet ceasing, Mr Bagnet removes his hand from his head as if
the shower-bath were over and looks disconsolately at Mr George, who
has turned quite white and looks distressfully at the grey cloak and
straw bonnet.

‘Mat,’ says the trooper in a subdued voice, addressing him but still
looking at his wife, I am sorry you take it so much to heart, because I
do hope it's not so bad as that comes to. I certainly have, this
morning, received this letter’--which he reads aloud--’but I hope it
may be set right yet. As to a rolling stone, why, what you say is true. I
AM a rolling stone, and I never rolled in anybody's way, I fully believe,
that I rolled the least good to. But it's impossible for an old vagabond
comrade to like your wife and family better than I like 'em, Mat, and I
trust you'll look upon me as forgivingly as you can. Don't think I've
kept anything from you. I haven't had the letter more than a quarter
of an hour.’

‘Old girl,’, murmurs Mr Bagnet after a short silence, ‘will you tell him
my opinion?’

‘Oh! Why didn't he marry,’ Mrs Bagnet answers, half laughing and half
crying, Joe Pouch's widder in North America? Then he wouldn't have
got himself into these troubles.’

‘The old girl,’ says Mr Bagnet, ‘puts it correct--why didn't you?’

‘Well, she has a better husband by this time, I hope,’ returns the
trooper. ‘Anyhow, here I stand, this present day, NOT married to Joe
Pouch's widder. What shall I do? You see all I have got about me. It's
not mine; it's yours. Give the word, and I'll sell off every morsel. If I
could have hoped it would have brought in nearly the sum wanted, I'd
have sold all long ago. Don't believe that I'll leave you or yours in the
lurch, Mat. I'd sell myself first. I only wish,’ says the trooper, giving
himself a disparaging blow in the chest, ‘that I knew of any one who'd
buy such a second-hand piece of old stores.’ ‘Old girl,’ murmurs Mr
Bagnet, ‘give him another bit of my mind.’

‘George,’ says the old girl, ‘you are not so much to be blamed, on full
consideration, except for ever taking this business without the means.’

‘And that was like me!’ observes the penitent trooper, shaking his
head. ‘Like me, I know.’
‘Silence! The old girl,’ says Mr Bagnet, ‘is correct--in her way of giving
my opinions--hear me out!’

That was when you never ought to have asked for the security,
George, and when you never ought to have got it, all things
considered. But what's done can't be undone. You are always an
honourable and straightforward fellow, as far as lays in your power,
though a little flighty. On the other hand, you can't admit but what
it's natural in us to be anxious with such a thing hanging over our
heads. So forget and forgive all round, George. Come! Forget and
forgive all round!’

Mrs Bagnet, giving him one of her honest hands and giving her
husband the other, Mr George gives each of them one of his and holds
them while he speaks.

T do assure you both, there's nothing I wouldn't do to discharge this
obligation. But whatever I have been able to scrape together has gone
every two months in keeping it up. We have lived plainly enough here,
Phil and I. But the gallery don't quite do what was expected of it, and
it's not--in short, it's not the mint. It was wrong in me to take it? Well,
so it was. But I was in a manner drawn into that step, and I thought it
might steady me, and set me up, and you'll try to overlook my having
such expectations, and upon my soul, I am very much obliged to you,
and very much ashamed of myself.’ With these concluding words, Mr
George gives a shake to each of the hands he holds, and relinquishing
them, backs a pace or two in a broad-chested, upright attitude, as if
he had made a final confession and were immediately going to be shot
with all military honours.

‘George, hear me out!’ says Mr Bagnet, glancing at his wife. ‘Old girl,
go on!’

Mr Bagnet, being in this singular manner heard out, has merely to
observe that the letter must be attended to without any delay, that it
is advisable that George and he should immediately wait on Mr
Smallweed in person, and that the primary object is to save and hold
harmless Mr Bagnet, who had none of the money. Mr George, entirely
assenting, puts on his hat and prepares to march with Mr Bagnet to
the enemy's camp.

‘Don't you mind a woman's hasty word, George,’ says Mrs Bagnet,
patting him on the shoulder. ‘I trust my old Lignum to you, and I am
sure you'll bring him through it.’

The trooper returns that this is kindly said and that he WILL bring
Lignum through it somehow. Upon which Mrs Bagnet, with her cloak,
basket, and umbrella, goes home, bright-eyed again, to the rest of her
family, and the comrades sally forth on the hopeful errand of
mollifying Mr Smallweed.

Whether there are two people in England less likely to come
satisfactorily out of any negotiation with Mr Smallweed than Mr
George and Mr Matthew Bagnet may be very reasonably questioned.
Also, notwithstanding their martial appearance, broad square
shoulders, and heavy tread, whether there are within the same limits
two more simple and unaccustomed children in all the Smallweedy
affairs of life. As they proceed with great gravity through the streets
towards the region of Mount Pleasant, Mr Bagnet, observing his
companion to be thoughtful, considers it a friendly part to refer to Mrs
Bagnet's late sally.

‘George, you know the old girl--she's as sweet and as mild as milk.
But touch her on the children--or myself--and she's off like
gunpowder.’

It does her credit, Mat!’

‘George,’ says Mr Bagnet, looking straight before him, ‘the old girl--
can't do anything--that don't do her credit. More or less. I never say
so. Discipline must be maintained.’

‘She's worth her weight in gold,’ says the trooper.

In gold?’ says Mr Bagnet. T'll tell you what. The old girl's weight--is
twelve stone six. Would I take that weight--in any metal--for the old
girl? No. Why not? Because the old girl's metal is far more precious--
than the preciousest metal. And she's ALL metal)’

‘You are right, Mat!’

‘When she took me--and accepted of the ring--she ‘listed under me
and the children--heart and head, for life. She's that earnest,’ says Mr
Bagnet, ‘and true to her colours--that, touch us with a finger--and she
turns out--and stands to her arms. If the old girl fires wide--once in a
way--at the call of duty--look over it, George. For she's loyal!’

‘Why, bless her, Mat,’ returns the trooper, T think the higher of her for
it!’

‘You are right!’ says Mr Bagnet with the warmest enthusiasm, though
without relaxing the rigidity of a single muscle. ‘Think as high of the
old girl--as the rock of Gibraltar--and still you'll be thinking low--of
such merits. But I never own to it before her. Discipline must be
maintained.’
These encomiums bring them to Mount Pleasant and to Grandfather
Smallweed's house. The door is opened by the perennial Judy, who,
having surveyed them from top to toe with no particular favour, but
indeed with a malignant sneer, leaves them standing there while she
consults the oracle as to their admission. The oracle may be inferred
to give consent from the circumstance of her returning with the words
on her honey lips that they can come in if they want to it. Thus
privileged, they come in and find Mr Smallweed with his feet in the
drawer of his chair as if it were a paper foot-bath and Mrs Smallweed
obscured with the cushion like a bird that is not to sing.

‘My dear friend,’ says Grandfather Smallweed with those two lean
affectionate arms of his stretched forth. ‘How de do? How de do? Who
is our friend, my dear friend?’

‘Why this,’ returns George, not able to be very conciliatory at first, ‘is
Matthew Bagnet, who has obliged me in that matter of ours, you
know.’

‘Oh! Mr Bagnet? Surely!’ The old man looks at him under his hand.
‘Hope you're well, Mr Bagnet? Fine man, Mr George! Military air, sir!’
No chairs being offered, Mr George brings one forward for Bagnet and
one for himself. They sit down, Mr Bagnet as if he had no power of
bending himself, except at the hips, for that purpose.

Judy,’ says Mr Smallweed, ‘bring the pipe.’

‘Why, I don't know,’ Mr George interposes, ‘that the young woman
need give herself that trouble, for to tell you the truth, I am not
inclined to smoke it to-day.’

‘Ain't you?’ returns the old man. ‘Judy, bring the pipe.’

‘The fact is, Mr Smallweed,’ proceeds George, ‘that I find myself in
rather an unpleasant state of mind. It appears to me, sir, that your
friend in the city has been playing tricks.’

‘Oh, dear no!’ says Grandfather Smallweed. ‘He never does that!’

‘Don't he? Well, I am glad to hear it, because I thought it might be HIS
doing. This, you know, I am speaking of. This letter.’

Grandfather Smallweed smiles in a very ugly way in recognition of the
letter.

‘What does it mean?’ asks Mr George.
Judy,’ says the old man. ‘Have you got the pipe? Give it to me. Did
you say what does it mean, my good friend?’

‘Aye! Now, come, come, you know, Mr Smallweed,’ urges the trooper,
constraining himself to speak as smoothly and confidentially as he
can, holding the open letter in one hand and resting the broad
knuckles of the other on his thigh, ‘a good lot of money has passed
between us, and we are face to face at the present moment, and are
both well aware of the understanding there has always been. I am
prepared to do the usual thing which I have done regularly and to
keep this matter going. I never got a letter like this from you before,
and I have been a little put about by it this morning, because here's
my friend Matthew Bagnet, who, you know, had none of the money--’

T DON'T know it, you know,’ says the old man quietly.
‘Why, con-found you--it, I mean--I tell you so, don't I?’

‘Oh, yes, you tell me so,’ returns Grandfather Smallweed. ‘But I don't
know it.’

‘Well!’ says the trooper, swallowing his fire. ‘I know it.’

Mr Smallweed replies with excellent temper, ‘Ah! That's quite another
thing!’ And adds, ‘But it don't matter. Mr Bagnet's situation is all one,
whether or no.’

The unfortunate George makes a great effort to arrange the affair
comfortably and to propitiate Mr Smallweed by taking him upon his
own terms.

‘That's just what I mean. As you say, Mr Smallweed, here's Matthew
Bagnet liable to be fixed whether or no. Now, you see, that makes his
good lady very uneasy in her mind, and me too, for whereas I'm a
harum-scarum sort of a good-for-nought that more kicks than
halfpence come natural to, why he's a steady family man, don't you
see? Now, Mr Smallweed,’ says the trooper, gaining confidence as he
proceeds in his soldierly mode of doing business, ‘although you and I
are good friends enough in a certain sort of a way, I am well aware
that I can't ask you to let my friend Bagnet off entirely.’

‘Oh, dear, you are too modest. You can ASK me anything, Mr George.’
(There is an ogreish kind of jocularity in Grandfather Smallweed to-
day.)

‘And you can refuse, you mean, eh? Or not you so much, perhaps, as
your friend in the city? Ha ha hal’
‘Ha ha ha!’ echoes Grandfather Smallweed. In such a very hard
manner and with eyes so particularly green that Mr Bagnet's natural
gravity is much deepened by the contemplation of that venerable man.

‘Come!’ says the sanguine George. I am glad to find we can be
pleasant, because I want to arrange this pleasantly. Here's my friend
Bagnet, and here am I. We'll settle the matter on the spot, if you
please, Mr Smallweed, in the usual way. And you'll ease my friend
Bagnet's mind, and his family's mind, a good deal if you'll just
mention to him what our understanding is.’

Here some shrill spectre cries out in a mocking manner, ‘Oh, good
gracious! Oh!’ Unless, indeed, it be the sportive Judy, who is found to
be silent when the startled visitors look round, but whose chin has
received a recent toss, expressive of derision and contempt. Mr
Bagnet's gravity becomes yet more profound.

‘But I think you asked me, Mr George’--old Smallweed, who all this
time has had the pipe in his hand, is the speaker now--7 think you
asked me, what did the letter mean?’

‘Why, yes, I did,’ returns the trooper in his off-hand way, ‘but I don't
care to know particularly, if it's all correct and pleasant.’

Mr Smallweed, purposely balking himself in an aim at the trooper's
head, throws the pipe on the ground and breaks it to pieces.

‘That's what it means, my dear friend. I'll smash you. I'll crumble you.
I'll powder you. Go to the devil!’

The two friends rise and look at one another. Mr Bagnet's gravity has
now attained its profoundest point.

‘Go to the devil!’ repeats the old man. T'll have no more of your pipe-
smokings and swaggerings. What? You're an independent dragoon,
too! Go to my lawyer (you remember where; you have been there
before) and show your independence now, will you? Come, my dear
friend, there's a chance for you. Open the street door, Judy; put these
blusterers out! Call in help if they don't go. Put 'em out!’

He vociferates this so loudly that Mr Bagnet, laying his hands on the
shoulders of his comrade before the latter can recover from his
amazement, gets him on the outside of the street door, which is
instantly slammed by the triumphant Judy. Utterly confounded, Mr
George awhile stands looking at the knocker. Mr Bagnet, in a perfect
abyss of gravity, walks up and down before the little parlour window
like a sentry and looks in every time he passes, apparently revolving
something in his mind.
‘Come, Mat,’ says Mr George when he has recovered himself, ‘we must
try the lawyer. Now, what do you think of this rascal?’

Mr Bagnet, stopping to take a farewell look into the parlour, replies
with one shake of his head directed at the interior, If my old girl had
been here--I'd have told him!’ Having so discharged himself of the
subject of his cogitations, he falls into step and marches off with the
trooper, shoulder to shoulder.

When they present themselves in Lincoln's Inn Fields, Mr Tulkinghorn
is engaged and not to be seen. He is not at all willing to see them, for
when they have waited a full hour, and the clerk, on his bell being
rung, takes the opportunity of mentioning as much, he brings forth no
more encouraging message than that Mr Tulkinghorn has nothing to
say to them and they had better not wait. They do wait, however, with
the perseverance of military tactics, and at last the bell rings again
and the client in possession comes out of Mr Tulkinghorn's room.

The client is a handsome old lady, no other than Mrs Rouncewell,
housekeeper at Chesney Wold. She comes out of the sanctuary with a
fair old-fashioned curtsy and softly shuts the door. She is treated with
some distinction there, for the clerk steps out of his pew to show her
through the outer office and to let her out. The old lady is thanking
him for his attention when she observes the comrades in waiting.

T beg your pardon, sir, but I think those gentlemen are military?’

The clerk referring the question to them with his eye, and Mr George
not turning round from the almanac over the fire-place. Mr Bagnet
takes upon himself to reply, ‘Yes, ma'am. Formerly.’

T thought so. I was sure of it. My heart warms, gentlemen, at the sight
of you. It always does at the sight of such. God bless you, gentlemen!
You'll excuse an old woman, but I had a son once who went for a
soldier. A fine handsome youth he was, and good in his bold way,
though some people did disparage him to his poor mother. I ask your
pardon for troubling you, sir. God bless you, gentlemen!’

‘Same to you, ma'am!’ returns Mr Bagnet with right good will.

There is something very touching in the earnestness of the old lady's
voice and in the tremble that goes through her quaint old figure. But
Mr George is so occupied with the almanac over the fire-place
(calculating the coming months by it perhaps) that he does not look
round until she has gone away and the door is closed upon her.
‘George,’ Mr Bagnet gruffly whispers when he does turn from the
almanac at last. ‘Don't be cast down! 'Why, soldiers, why--should we
be melancholy, boys?’ Cheer up, my hearty!’

The clerk having now again gone in to say that they are still there and
Mr Tulkinghorn being heard to return with some irascibility, ‘Let 'em
come in then!’ they pass into the great room with the painted ceiling
and find him standing before the fire.

‘Now, you men, what do you want? Sergeant, I told you the last time I
saw you that I don't desire your company here.’

Sergeant replies--dashed within the last few minutes as to his usual
manner of speech, and even as to his usual carriage--that he has
received this letter, has been to Mr Smallweed about it, and has been
referred there.

T have nothing to say to you,’ rejoins Mr Tulkinghorn. Tf you get into
debt, you must pay your debts or take the consequences. You have no
occasion to come here to learn that, I suppose?’

Sergeant is sorry to say that he is not prepared with the money.

Very well! Then the other man--this man, if this is he--must pay it for

?

you.

Sergeant is sorry to add that the other man is not prepared with the
money either.

Very well! Then you must pay it between you or you must both be
sued for it and both suffer. You have had the money and must refund
it. You are not to pocket other people's pounds, shillings, and pence
and escape scot-free.’

The lawyer sits down in his easy-chair and stirs the fire. Mr George
hopes he will have the goodness to--

T tell you, sergeant, I have nothing to say to you. I don't like your
associates and don't want you here. This matter is not at all in my
course of practice and is not in my office. Mr Smallweed is good
enough to offer these affairs to me, but they are not in my way. You
must go to Melchisedech's in Clifford's Inn.’

T must make an apology to you, sir,’ says Mr George, ‘for pressing
myself upon you with so little encouragement--which is almost as
unpleasant to me as it can be to you--but would you let me say a
private word to you?’
Mr Tulkinghorn rises with his hands in his pockets and walks into
one of the window recesses. ‘Now! I have no time to waste.’ In the
midst of his perfect assumption of indifference, he directs a sharp look
at the trooper, taking care to stand with his own back to the light and
to have the other with his face towards it.

‘Well, sir,’ says Mr George, ‘this man with me is the other party
implicated in this unfortunate affair--nominally, only nominally-- and
my sole object is to prevent his getting into trouble on my account. He
is a most respectable man with a wife and family, formerly in the
Royal Artillery--’

‘My friend, I don't care a pinch of snuff for the whole Royal Artillery
establishment--officers, men, tumbrils, waggons, horses, guns, and
ammunition.’

“Tis likely, sir. But I care a good deal for Bagnet and his wife and
family being injured on my account. And if I could bring them through
this matter, I should have no help for it but to give up without any
other consideration what you wanted of me the other day.’

‘Have you got it here?’
T have got it here, sir.’

‘Sergeant,’ the lawyer proceeds in his dry passionless manner, far
more hopeless in the dealing with than any amount of vehemence,
‘make up your mind while I speak to you, for this is final. After I have
finished speaking I have closed the subject, and I won't re- open it.
Understand that. You can leave here, for a few days, what you say you
have brought here if you choose; you can take it away at once if you
choose. In case you choose to leave it here, I can do this for you--I can
replace this matter on its old footing, and I can go so far besides as to
give you a written undertaking that this man Bagnet shall never be
troubled in any way until you have been proceeded against to the
utmost, that your means shall be exhausted before the creditor looks
to his. This is in fact all but freeing him. Have you decided?’

The trooper puts his hand into his breast and answers with a long
breath, I must do it, sir.’

So Mr Tulkinghorn, putting on his spectacles, sits down and writes
the undertaking, which he slowly reads and explains to Bagnet, who
has all this time been staring at the ceiling and who puts his hand on
his bald head again, under this new verbal shower-bath, and seems
exceedingly in need of the old girl through whom to express his
sentiments. The trooper then takes from his breast-pocket a folded
paper, which he lays with an unwilling hand at the lawyer's elbow.
“Tis only a letter of instructions, sir. The last I ever had from him.’

Look at a millstone, Mr George, for some change in its expression, and
you will find it quite as soon as in the face of Mr Tulkinghorn when he
opens and reads the letter! He refolds it and lays it in his desk with a
countenance as unperturbable as death.

Nor has he anything more to say or do but to nod once in the same
frigid and discourteous manner and to say briefly, ‘You can go. Show
these men out, there!’ Being shown out, they repair to Mr Bagnet's
residence to dine.

Boiled beef and greens constitute the day's variety on the former
repast of boiled pork and greens, and Mrs Bagnet serves out the meal
in the same way and seasons it with the best of temper, being that
rare sort of old girl that she receives Good to her arms without a hint
that it might be Better and catches light from any little spot of
darkness near her. The spot on this occasion is the darkened brow of
Mr George; he is unusually thoughtful and depressed. At first Mrs
Bagnet trusts to the combined endearments of Quebec and Malta to
restore him, but finding those young ladies sensible that their existing
Bluffy is not the Bluffy of their usual frolicsome acquaintance, she
winks off the light infantry and leaves him to deploy at leisure on the
open ground of the domestic hearth.

But he does not. He remains in close order, clouded and depressed.
During the lengthy cleaning up and pattening process, when he and
Mr Bagnet are supplied with their pipes, he is no better than he was
at dinner. He forgets to smoke, looks at the fire and ponders, lets his
pipe out, fills the breast of Mr Bagnet with perturbation and dismay
by showing that he has no enjoyment of tobacco.

Therefore when Mrs Bagnet at last appears, rosy from the invigorating
pail, and sits down to her work, Mr Bagnet growls, ‘Old girl!’ and

winks monitions to her to find out what's the matter.

‘Why, George!’ says Mrs Bagnet, quietly threading her needle. ‘How
low you are!’

‘Am I? Not good company? Well, I am afraid I am not.’
‘He ain't at all like Bluffy, mother!’ cries little Malta.

‘Because he ain't well, I think, mother,’ adds Quebec.
‘Sure that's a bad sign not to be like Bluffy, too!’ returns the trooper,
kissing the young damsels. ‘But it's true,’ with a sigh, ‘true, I am
afraid. These little ones are always right!’

‘George,’ says Mrs Bagnet, working busily, ‘if I thought you cross
enough to think of anything that a shrill old soldier's wife--who could
have bitten her tongue off afterwards and ought to have done it
almost--said this morning, I don't know what I shouldn't say to you

?

now.
‘My kind soul of a darling,’ returns the trooper. ‘Not a morsel of it.’

‘Because really and truly, George, what I said and meant to say was
that I trusted Lignum to you and was sure you'd bring him through it.
And you HAVE brought him through it, noble!’

‘Thankee, my dear!’ says George. ‘I am glad of your good opinion.’

In giving Mrs Bagnet's hand, with her work in it, a friendly shake--for
she took her seat beside him--the trooper's attention is attracted to
her face. After looking at it for a little while as she plies her needle, he
looks to young Woolwich, sitting on his stool in the corner, and
beckons that fifer to him.

‘See there, my boy,’ says George, very gently smoothing the mother's
hair with his hand, ‘there's a good loving forehead for you! All bright
with love of you, my boy. A little touched by the sun and the weather
through following your father about and taking care of you, but as
fresh and wholesome as a ripe apple on a tree.’

Mr Bagnet's face expresses, so far as in its wooden material lies, the
highest approbation and acquiescence.

‘The time will come, my boy,’ pursues the trooper, ‘when this hair of
your mother's will be grey, and this forehead all crossed and re-
crossed with wrinkles, and a fine old lady she'll be then. Take care,
while you are young, that you can think in those days, 'I never
whitened a hair of her dear head--I never marked a sorrowful line in
her face!' For of all the many things that you can think of when you
are a man, you had better have THAT by you, Woolwich!’

Mr George concludes by rising from his chair, seating the boy beside
his mother in it, and saying, with something of a hurry about him,
that he'll smoke his pipe in the street a bit.
CHAPTER XXXV - Esther's Narrative

I lay ill through several weeks, and the usual tenor of my life became
like an old remembrance. But this was not the effect of time so much
as of the change in all my habits made by the helplessness and
inaction of a sick-room. Before I had been confined to it many days,
everything else seemed to have retired into a remote distance where
there was little or no separation between the various stages of my life
which had been really divided by years. In falling ill, I seemed to have
crossed a dark lake and to have left all my experiences, mingled
together by the great distance, on the healthy shore.

My housekeeping duties, though at first it caused me great anxiety to
think that they were unperformed, were soon as far off as the oldest of
the old duties at Greenleaf or the summer afternoons when I went
home from school with my portfolio under my arm, and my childish
shadow at my side, to my godmother's house. I had never known
before how short life really was and into how small a space the mind
could put it.

While I was very ill, the way in which these divisions of time became
confused with one another distressed my mind exceedingly. At once a
child, an elder girl, and the little woman I had been so happy as, I was
not only oppressed by cares and difficulties adapted to each station,
but by the great perplexity of endlessly trying to reconcile them. I
suppose that few who have not been in such a condition can quite
understand what I mean or what painful unrest arose from this
source.

For the same reason I am almost afraid to hint at that time in my
disorder--it seemed one long night, but I believe there were both
nights and days in it--when I laboured up colossal staircases, ever
striving to reach the top, and ever turned, as I have seen a worm ina
garden path, by some obstruction, and labouring again. I knew
perfectly at intervals, and I think vaguely at most times, that I was in
my bed; and I talked with Charley, and felt her touch, and knew her
very well; yet I would find myself complaining, ‘Oh, more of these
never-ending stairs, Charley--more and more--piled up to the sky’, I
think!’ and labouring on again.

Dare I hint at that worse time when, strung together somewhere in
great black space, there was a flaming necklace, or ring, or starry
circle of some kind, of which I was one of the beads! And when my
only prayer was to be taken off from the rest and when it was such
inexplicable agony and misery to be a part of the dreadful thing?

Perhaps the less I say of these sick experiences, the less tedious and
the more intelligible I shall be. I do not recall them to make others
unhappy or because I am now the least unhappy in remembering
them. It may be that if we knew more of such strange afflictions we
might be the better able to alleviate their intensity.

The repose that succeeded, the long delicious sleep, the blissful rest,
when in my weakness I was too calm to have any care for myself and
could have heard (or so I think now) that I was dying, with no other
emotion than with a pitying love for those I left behind--this state can
be perhaps more widely understood. I was in this state when I first
shrunk from the light as it twinkled on me once more, and knew with
a boundless joy for which no words are rapturous enough that I
should see again.

I had heard my Ada crying at the door, day and night; I had heard her
calling to me that I was cruel and did not love her; I had heard her
praying and imploring to be let in to nurse and comfort me and to
leave my bedside no more; but I had only said, when I could speak,
‘Never, my sweet girl, never!’ and I had over and over again reminded
Charley that she was to keep my darling from the room whether I lived
or died. Charley had been true to me in that time of need, and with
her little hand and her great heart had kept the door fast.

But now, my sight strengthening and the glorious light coming every
day more fully and brightly on me, I could read the letters that my
dear wrote to me every morning and evening and could put them to
my lips and lay my cheek upon them with no fear of hurting her. I
could see my little maid, so tender and so careful, going about the two
rooms setting everything in order and speaking cheerfully to Ada from
the open window again. I could understand the stillness in the house
and the thoughtfulness it expressed on the part of all those who had
always been so good to me. I could weep in the exquisite felicity of my
heart and be as happy in my weakness as ever I had been in my
strength.

By and by my strength began to be restored. Instead of lying, with so
strange a calmness, watching what was done for me, as if it were done
for some one else whom I was quietly sorry for, I helped it a little, and
so on to a little more and much more, until I became useful to myself,
and interested, and attached to life again.

How well I remember the pleasant afternoon when I was raised in bed
with pillows for the first time to enjoy a great tea-drinking with
Charley! The little creature--sent into the world, surely, to minister to
the weak and sick--was so happy, and so busy, and stopped so often
in her preparations to lay her head upon my bosom, and fondle me,
and cry with joyful tears she was so glad, she was so glad, that I was
obliged to say, ‘Charley, if you go on in this way, I must lie down
again, my darling, for I am weaker than I thought I was!’ So Charley
became as quiet as a mouse and took her bright face here and there
across and across the two rooms, out of the shade into the divine
sunshine, and out of the sunshine into the shade, while I watched her
peacefully. When all her preparations were concluded and the pretty
tea-table with its little delicacies to tempt me, and its white cloth, and
its flowers, and everything so lovingly and beautifully arranged for me
by Ada downstairs, was ready at the bedside, I felt sure I was steady
enough to say something to Charley that was not new to my thoughts.

First I complimented Charley on the room, and indeed it was so fresh
and airy, so spotless and neat, that I could scarce believe I had been
lying there so long. This delighted Charley, and her face was brighter
than before.

Yet, Charley,’ said I, looking round, I miss something, surely, that I
am accustomed to?’

Poor little Charley looked round too and pretended to shake her head
as if there were nothing absent.

‘Are the pictures all as they used to be?’ I asked her.

‘Every one of them, miss,’ said Charley.

‘And the furniture, Charley?’

‘Except where I have moved it about to make more room, miss.’

‘And yet,’ said I, I miss some familiar object. Ah, I know what it is,
Charley! It's the looking-glass.’

Charley got up from the table, making as if she had forgotten
something, and went into the next room; and I heard her sob there.

I had thought of this very often. I was now certain of it. I could thank
God that it was not a shock to me now. I called Charley back, and
when she came--at first pretending to smile, but as she drew nearer to
me, looking grieved--I took her in my arms and said, It matters very
little, Charley. I hope I can do without my old face very well.’

I was presently so far advanced as to be able to sit up in a great chair
and even giddily to walk into the adjoining room, leaning on Charley.
The mirror was gone from its usual place in that room too, but what I
had to bear was none the harder to bear for that.

My guardian had throughout been earnest to visit me, and there was
now no good reason why I should deny myself that happiness. He
came one morning, and when he first came in, could only hold me in
his embrace and say, “My dear, dear girl!’ I had long known--who
could know better?--what a deep fountain of affection and generosity
his heart was; and was it not worth my trivial suffering and change to
fill such a place in it? ‘Oh, yes!’ I thought. ‘He has seen me, and he
loves me better than he did; he has seen me and is even fonder of me
than he was before; and what have I to mourn for!’

He sat down by me on the sofa, supporting me with his arm. For a
little while he sat with his hand over his face, but when he removed it,
fell into his usual manner. There never can have been, there never can
be, a pleasanter manner.

‘My little woman,’ said he, ‘what a sad time this has been. Such an
inflexible little woman, too, through all!’

‘Only for the best, guardian,’ said I.

‘For the best?’ he repeated tenderly. ‘Of course, for the best. But here
have Ada and I been perfectly forlorn and miserable; here has your
friend Caddy been coming and going late and early; here has every
one about the house been utterly lost and dejected; here has even
poor Rick been writing--to ME too--in his anxiety for you!’

I had read of Caddy in Ada's letters, but not of Richard. I told him so.

‘Why, no, my dear,’ he replied. I have thought it better not to mention
it to her.’

‘And you speak of his writing to YOU,’ said I, repeating his emphasis.
‘As if it were not natural for him to do so, guardian; as if he could
write to a better friend!’

‘He thinks he could, my love,’ returned my guardian, ‘and to many a
better. The truth is, he wrote to me under a sort of protest while
unable to write to you with any hope of an answer--wrote coldly,
haughtily, distantly, resentfully. Well, dearest little woman, we must
look forbearingly on it. He is not to blame. Jarndyce and Jarndyce has
warped him out of himself and perverted me in his eyes. I have known
it do as bad deeds, and worse, many a time. If two angels could be
concerned in it, I believe it would change their nature.’

Tt has not changed yours, guardian.’

‘Oh, yes, it has, my dear,’ he said laughingly. ‘It has made the south
wind easterly, I don't know how often. Rick mistrusts and suspects
me--goes to lawyers, and is taught to mistrust and suspect me. Hears
I have conflicting interests, claims clashing against his and what not.
Whereas, heaven knows that if I could get out of the mountains of
wiglomeration on which my unfortunate name has been so long
bestowed (which I can't) or could level them by the extinction of my
own original right (which I can't either, and no human power ever can,
anyhow, I believe, to such a pass have we got), I would do it this hour.
I would rather restore to poor Rick his proper nature than be endowed
with all the money that dead suitors, broken, heart and soul, upon
the wheel of Chancery, have left unclaimed with the Accountant-
General--and that's money enough, my dear, to be cast into a
pyramid, in memory of Chancery's transcendent wickedness.’

IS it possible, guardian,’ I asked, amazed, ‘that Richard can be
suspicious of you?’

‘Ah, my love, my love,’ he said, ‘it is in the subtle poison of such
abuses to breed such diseases. His blood is infected, and objects lose
their natural aspects in his sight. It is not HIS fault.’

‘But it is a terrible misfortune, guardian.’

It is a terrible misfortune, little woman, to be ever drawn within the
influences of Jarndyce and Jarndyce. I know none greater. By little
and little he has been induced to trust in that rotten reed, and it
communicates some portion of its rottenness to everything around
him. But again I say with all my soul, we must be patient with poor
Rick and not blame him. What a troop of fine fresh hearts like his
have I seen in my time turned by the same means!’

I could not help expressing something of my wonder and regret that
his benevolent, disinterested intentions had prospered so little.

‘We must not say so, Dame Durden,’ he cheerfully replied; ‘Ada is the
happier, I hope, and that is much. I did think that I and both these
young creatures might be friends instead of distrustful foes and that
we might so far counter-act the suit and prove too strong for it. But it
was too much to expect. Jarndyce and Jarndyce was the curtain of
Rick's cradle.’

‘But, guardian, may we not hope that a little experience will teach him
what a false and wretched thing it is?’

‘We WILL hope so, my Esther,’ said Mr Jarndyce, ‘and that it may not
teach him so too late. In any case we must not be hard on him. There
are not many grown and matured men living while we speak, good
men too, who if they were thrown into this same court as suitors
would not be vitally changed and depreciated within three years--
within two--within one. How can we stand amazed at poor Rick? A
young man so unfortunate,’ here he fell into a lower tone, as if he were
thinking aloud, ‘cannot at first believe (who could?) that Chancery is
what it is. He looks to it, flushed and fitfully, to do something with his
interests and bring them to some settlement. It procrastinates,
disappoints, tries, tortures him; wears out his sanguine hopes and
patience, thread by thread; but he still looks to it, and hankers after
it, and finds his whole world treacherous and hollow. Well, well, well!
Enough of this, my dear!’

He had supported me, as at first, all this time, and his tenderness was
so precious to me that I leaned my head upon his shoulder and loved
him as if he had been my father. I resolved in my own mind in this
little pause, by some means, to see Richard when I grew strong and
try to set him right.

‘There are better subjects than these,’ said my guardian, ‘for such a
joyful time as the time of our dear girl's recovery. And I had a
commission to broach one of them as soon as I should begin to talk.
When shall Ada come to see you, my love?’

I had been thinking of that too. A little in connexion with the absent
mirrors, but not much, for I knew my loving girl would be changed by
no change in my looks.

‘Dear guardian,’ said I, ‘as I have shut her out so long--though indeed,
indeed, she is like the light to me--’

T know it well, Dame Durden, well.’

He was so good, his touch expressed such endearing compassion and
affection, and the tone of his voice carried such comfort into my heart
that I stopped for a little while, quite unable to go on. ‘Yes, yes, you
are tired,’ said he. ‘Rest a little.’ ‘As I have kept Ada out so long,’ I
began afresh after a short while, ‘I think I should like to have my own
way a little longer, guardian. It would be best to be away from here
before I see her. If Charley and I were to go to some country lodging as
soon as I can move, and if I had a week there in which to grow
stronger and to be revived by the sweet air and to look forward to the
happiness of having Ada with me again, I think it would be better for
Us.’

I hope it was not a poor thing in me to wish to be a little more used to
my altered self before I met the eyes of the dear girl I longed so
ardently to see, but it is the truth. I did. He understood me, I was
sure; but I was not afraid of that. If it were a poor thing, I knew he
would pass it over.

‘Our spoilt little woman,’ said my guardian, ‘shall have her own way
even in her inflexibility, though at the price, I know, of tears
downstairs. And see here! Here is Boythorn, heart of chivalry,
breathing such ferocious vows as never were breathed on paper
before, that if you don't go and occupy his whole house, he having
already turned out of it expressly for that purpose, by heaven and by
earth he'll pull it down and not leave one brick standing on another!’

And my guardian put a letter in my hand, without any ordinary
beginning such as “My dear Jarndyce,’ but rushing at once into the
words, I swear if Miss Summerson do not come down and take
possession of my house, which I vacate for her this day at one o'clock,
P.M.,’ and then with the utmost seriousness, and in the most
emphatic terms, going on to make the extraordinary declaration he
had quoted. We did not appreciate the writer the less for laughing
heartily over it, and we settled that I should send him a letter of
thanks on the morrow and accept his offer. It was a most agreeable
one to me, for all the places I could have thought of, I should have
liked to go to none so well as Chesney Wold.

‘Now, little housewife,’ said my guardian, looking at his watch, T was
strictly timed before I came upstairs, for you must not be tired too
soon; and my time has waned away to the last minute. I have one
other petition. Little Miss Flite, hearing a rumour that you were ill,
made nothing of walking down here--twenty miles, poor soul, in a pair
of dancing shoes--to inquire. It was heaven's mercy we were at home,
or she would have walked back again.’

The old conspiracy to make me happy! Everybody seemed to be in it!

‘Now, pet,’ said my guardian, ‘if it would not be irksome to you to
admit the harmless little creature one afternoon before you save
Boythorn's otherwise devoted house from demolition, I believe you
would make her prouder and better pleased with herself than I--
though my eminent name is Jarndyce--could do in a lifetime.’

I have no doubt he knew there would be something in the simple
image of the poor afflicted creature that would fall like a gentle lesson
on my mind at that time. I felt it as he spoke to me. I could not tell
him heartily enough how ready I was to receive her. I had always
pitied her, never so much as now. I had always been glad of my little
power to soothe her under her calamity, but never, never, half so glad
before.

We arranged a time for Miss Flite to come out by the coach and share
my early dinner. When my guardian left me, I turned my face away
upon my couch and prayed to be forgiven if I, surrounded by such
blessings, had magnified to myself the little trial that I had to undergo.
The childish prayer of that old birthday when I had aspired to be
industrious, contented, and true-hearted and to do good to some one
and win some love to myself if I could came back into my mind with a
reproachful sense of all the happiness I had since enjoyed and all the
affectionate hearts that had been turned towards me. If I were weak
now, what had I profited by those mercies? I repeated the old childish
prayer in its old childish words and found that its old peace had not
departed from it.

My guardian now came every day. In a week or so more I could walk
about our rooms and hold long talks with Ada from behind the
window-curtain. Yet I never saw her, for I had not as yet the courage
to look at the dear face, though I could have done so easily without
her seeing me.

On the appointed day Miss Flite arrived. The poor little creature ran
into my room quite forgetful of her usual dignity, and crying from her
very heart of hearts, “My dear Fitz Jarndyce!’ fell upon my neck and
kissed me twenty times.

‘Dear me!’ said she, putting her hand into her reticule, I have nothing
here but documents, my dear Fitz Jarndyce; I must borrow a pocket
handkerchief.’

Charley gave her one, and the good creature certainly made use of it,
for she held it to her eyes with both hands and sat so, shedding tears
for the next ten minutes.

‘With pleasure, my dear Fitz Jarndyce,’ she was careful to explain.
‘Not the least pain. Pleasure to see you well again. Pleasure at having
the honour of being admitted to see you. I am so much fonder of you,
my love, than of the Chancellor. Though I DO attend court regularly.
By the by, my dear, mentioning pocket handkerchiefs--’

Miss Flite here looked at Charley, who had been to meet her at the
place where the coach stopped. Charley glanced at me and looked
unwilling to pursue the suggestion.

Ve-ry right!’ said Miss Flite, ‘Ve-ry correct. Truly! Highly indiscreet of
me to mention it; but my dear Miss Fitz Jarndyce, I am afraid I am at
times (between ourselves, you wouldn't think it) a little--rambling you
know,’ said Miss Flite, touching her forehead. ‘Nothing more.’

‘What were you going to tell me?’ said I, smiling, for I saw she wanted
to go on. ‘You have roused my curiosity, and now you must gratify it.’

Miss Flite looked at Charley for advice in this important crisis, who
said, If you please, ma'am, you had better tell then,’ and therein
gratified Miss Flite beyond measure.
‘So sagacious, our young friend,’ said she to me in her mysterious
way. ‘Diminutive. But ve-ry sagacious! Well, my dear, it's a pretty
anecdote. Nothing more. Still I think it charming. Who should follow
us down the road from the coach, my dear, but a poor person in a
very ungenteel bonnet--’

Jenny, if you please, miss,’ said Charley.

‘Just so!’ Miss Flite acquiesced with the greatest suavity. Uenny. Ye-
es! And what does she tell our young friend but that there has been a
lady with a veil inquiring at her cottage after my dear Fitz Jarndyce's
health and taking a handkerchief away with her as a little keepsake
merely because it was my amiable Fitz Jarndyce's! Now, you know, so
very prepossessing in the lady with the veil!’

If you please, miss,’ said Charley, to whom I looked in some
astonishment, Jenny says that when her baby died, you left a
handkerchief there, and that she put it away and kept it with the
baby's little things. I think, if you please, partly because it was yours,
miss, and partly because it had covered the baby.’

‘Diminutive,’ whispered Miss Flite, making a variety of motions about
her own forehead to express intellect in Charley. ‘But ex- ceedingly
sagacious! And so dear! My love, she's clearer than any counsel I ever
heard!’

‘Yes, Charley,’ I returned. ‘I remember it. Well?’

‘Well, miss,’ said Charley, ‘and that's the handkerchief the lady took.
And Jenny wants you to know that she wouldn't have made away with
it herself for a heap of money but that the lady took it and left some
money instead. Jenny don't know her at all, if you please, miss!’

‘Why, who can she be?’ said I.

‘My love,’ Miss Flite suggested, advancing her lips to my ear with her
most mysterious look, ‘in MY opinion--don't mention this to our
diminutive friend--she's the Lord Chancellor's wife. He's married, you
know. And I understand she leads him a terrible life. Throws his
lordship's papers into the fire, my dear, if he won't pay the jeweller!’

I did not think very much about this lady then, for I had an
impression that it might be Caddy. Besides, my attention was diverted
by my visitor, who was cold after her ride and looked hungry and who,
our dinner being brought in, required some little assistance in
arraying herself with great satisfaction in a pitiable old scarf and a
much-worn and often-mended pair of gloves, which she had brought
down in a paper parcel. I had to preside, too, over the entertainment,
consisting of a dish of fish, a roast fowl, a sweetbread, vegetables,
pudding, and Madeira; and it was so pleasant to see how she enjoyed
it, and with what state and ceremony she did honour to it, that I was
soon thinking of nothing else.

When we had finished and had our little dessert before us,
embellished by the hands of my dear, who would yield the
superintendence of everything prepared for me to no one, Miss Flite
was so very chatty and happy that I thought I would lead her to her
own history, as she was always pleased to talk about herself. I began
by saying ‘You have attended on the Lord Chancellor many years,
Miss Flite?’

‘Oh, many, many, many years, my dear. But I expect a judgment.
Shortly.’

There was an anxiety even in her hopefulness that made me doubtful
if I had done right in approaching the subject. I thought I would say

no more about it.

‘My father expected a judgment,’ said Miss Flite. ‘My brother. My
sister. They all expected a judgment. The same that I expect.’

‘They are all--’
‘Ye-es. Dead of course, my dear,’ said she.

As I saw she would go on, I thought it best to try to be serviceable to
her by meeting the theme rather than avoiding it.

‘Would it not be wiser,’ said I, ‘to expect this judgment no more?’

‘Why, my dear,’ she answered promptly, ‘of course it would!’

‘And to attend the court no more?’

‘Equally of course,’ said she. ‘Very wearing to be always in expectation
of what never comes, my dear Fitz Jarndyce! Wearing, I assure you, to
the bone!’

She slightly showed me her arm, and it was fearfully thin indeed.

‘But, my dear,’ she went on in her mysterious way, ‘there's a dreadful
attraction in the place. Hush! Don't mention it to our diminutive
friend when she comes in. Or it may frighten her. With good reason.

There's a cruel attraction in the place. You CAN'T leave it. And you
MUST expect.’
I tried to assure her that this was not so. She heard me patiently and
smilingly, but was ready with her own answer.

‘Aye, aye, aye! You think so because I am a little rambling. Ve- ry
absurd, to be a little rambling, is it not? Ve-ry confusing, too. To the
head. I find it so. But, my dear, I have been there many years, and I
have noticed. It's the mace and seal upon the table.’

What could they do, did she think? I mildly asked her.

‘Draw,’ returned Miss Flite. ‘Draw people on, my dear. Draw peace out
of them. Sense out of them. Good looks out of them. Good qualities
out of them. I have felt them even drawing my rest away in the night.
Cold and glittering devils!’

She tapped me several times upon the arm and nodded good-
humouredly as if she were anxious I should understand that I had no
cause to fear her, though she spoke so gloomily, and confided these
awful secrets to me.

‘Let me see,’ said she. T'll tell you my own case. Before they ever drew
me--before I had ever seen them--what was it I used to do?
Tambourine playing? No. Tambour work. I and my sister worked at
tambour work. Our father and our brother had a builder's business.
We all lived together. Ve-ry respectably, my dear! First, our father was
drawn--slowly. Home was drawn with him. In a few years he was a
fierce, sour, angry bankrupt without a kind word or a kind look for
any one. He had been so different, Fitz Jarndyce. He was drawn to a
debtors' prison. There he died. Then our brother was drawn--swiftly--
to drunkenness. And rags. And death. Then my sister was drawn.
Hush! Never ask to what! Then I was ill and in misery, and heard, as I
had often heard before, that this was all the work of Chancery. When I
got better, I went to look at the monster. And then I found out how it
was, and I was drawn to stay there.’

Having got over her own short narrative, in the delivery of which she
had spoken in a low, strained voice, as if the shock were fresh upon
her, she gradually resumed her usual air of amiable importance.

‘You don't quite credit me, my dear! Well, well! You will, some day. I
am a little rambling. But I have noticed. I have seen many new faces
come, unsuspicious, within the influence of the mace and seal in
these many years. As my father's came there. As my brother's. As my
sister's. AS my own. I hear Conversation Kenge and the rest of them
say to the new faces, ‘Here's little Miss Flite. Oh, you are new here;
and you must come and be presented to little Miss Flite!’ Ve-ry good.
Proud I am sure to have the honour! And we all laugh. But, Fitz
Jarndyce, I know what will happen. I know, far better than they do,
when the attraction has begun. I know the signs, my dear. I saw them
begin in Gridley. And I saw them end. Fitz Jarndyce, my love,’
speaking low again, ‘I saw them beginning in our friend the ward in
Jarndyce. Let some one hold him back. Or he'll be drawn to ruin.’

She looked at me in silence for some moments, with her face gradually
softening into a smile. Seeming to fear that she had been too gloomy,
and seeming also to lose the connexion in her mind, she said politely
as she sipped her glass of wine, ‘Yes, my dear, as I was saying, I
expect a judgment shortly. Then I shall release my birds, you know,
and confer estates.’

I was much impressed by her allusion to Richard and by the sad
meaning, so sadly illustrated in her poor pinched form, that made its
way through all her incoherence. But happily for her, she was quite
complacent again now and beamed with nods and smiles.

‘But, my dear,’ she said, gaily, reaching another hand to put it upon
mine. ‘You have not congratulated me on my physician. Positively not
once, yet!’

I was obliged to confess that I did not quite know what she meant.

‘My physician, Mr Woodcourt, my dear, who was so exceedingly
attentive to me. Though his services were rendered quite gratuitously.
Until the Day of Judgment. I mean THE judgment that will dissolve

the spell upon me of the mace and seal.’

‘Mr Woodcourt is so far away, now,’ said I, ‘that I thought the time for
such congratulation was past, Miss Flite.’

‘But, my child,’ she returned, ‘is it possible that you don't know what
has happened?’

‘No,’ said I.

‘Not what everybody has been talking of, my beloved Fitz Jarndyce!’
‘No,’ said I. ‘You forget how long I have been here.’

‘True! My dear, for the moment--true. I blame myself. But my memory
has been drawn out of me, with everything else, by what I mentioned.
Ve-ry strong influence, is it not? Well, my dear, there has been a

terrible shipwreck over in those East Indian seas.’

‘Mr Woodcourt shipwrecked!’
‘Don't be agitated, my dear. He is safe. An awful scene. Death in all
shapes. Hundreds of dead and dying. Fire, storm, and darkness.
Numbers of the drowning thrown upon a rock. There, and through it
all, my dear physician was a hero. Calm and brave through
everything. Saved many lives, never complained in hunger and thirst,
wrapped naked people in his spare clothes, took the lead, showed
them what to do, governed them, tended the sick, buried the dead,
and brought the poor survivors safely off at last! My dear, the poor
emaciated creatures all but worshipped him. They fell down at his feet
when they got to the land and blessed him. The whole country rings
with it. Stay! Where's my bag of documents? I have got it there, and
you shall read it, you shall read it!’

And I DID read all the noble history, though very slowly and
imperfectly then, for my eyes were so dimmed that I could not see the
words, and I cried so much that I was many times obliged to lay down
the long account she had cut out of the newspaper. I felt so
triumphant ever to have known the man who had done such generous
and gallant deeds, I felt such glowing exultation in his renown, I so
admired and loved what he had done, that I envied the storm-worn
people who had fallen at his feet and blessed him as their preserver. I
could myself have kneeled down then, so far away, and blessed him in
my rapture that he should be so truly good and brave. I felt that no
one--mother, sister, wife--could honour him more than I. I did, indeed!

My poor little visitor made me a present of the account, and when as
the evening began to close in she rose to take her leave, lest she
should miss the coach by which she was to return, she was still full of
the shipwreck, which I had not yet sufficiently composed myself to
understand in all its details.

‘My dear,’ said she as she carefully folded up her scarf and gloves, ‘my
brave physician ought to have a title bestowed upon him. And no
doubt he will. You are of that opinion?’

That he well deserved one, yes. That he would ever have one, no.
‘Why not, Fitz Jarndyce?’ she asked rather sharply.

I said it was not the custom in England to confer titles on men
distinguished by peaceful services, however good and great, unless
occasionally when they consisted of the accumulation of some very
large amount of money.

‘Why, good gracious,’ said Miss Flite, ‘how can you say that? Surely
you know, my dear, that all the greatest ornaments of England in
knowledge, imagination, active humanity, and improvement of every
sort are added to its nobility! Look round you, my dear, and consider.
YOU must be rambling a little now, I think, if you don't know that this
is the great reason why titles will always last in the land!’

I am afraid she believed what she said, for there were moments when
she was very mad indeed.

And now I must part with the little secret I have thus far tried to keep.
I had thought, sometimes, that Mr Woodcourt loved me and that if he
had been richer he would perhaps have told me that he loved me
before he went away. I had thought, sometimes, that if he had done
so, I should have been glad of it. But how much better it was now that
this had never happened! What should I have suffered if I had had to
write to him and tell him that the poor face he had known as mine
was quite gone from me and that I freely released him from his
bondage to one whom he had never seen!

Oh, it was so much better as it was! With a great pang mercifully
spared me, I could take back to my heart my childish prayer to be all
he had so brightly shown himself; and there was nothing to be
undone: no chain for me to break or for him to drag; and I could go,
please God, my lowly way along the path of duty, and he could go his
nobler way upon its broader road; and though we were apart upon the
journey, I might aspire to meet him, unselfishly, innocently, better far
than he had thought me when I found some favour in his eyes, at the
journey's end.
CHAPTER XXXVI - Chesney Wold

Charley and I did not set off alone upon our expedition into
Lincolnshire. My guardian had made up his mind not to lose sight of
me until I was safe in Mr Boythorn's house, so he accompanied us,
and we were two days upon the road. I found every breath of air, and
every scent, and every flower and leaf and blade of grass, and every
passing cloud, and everything in nature, more beautiful and
wonderful to me than I had ever found it yet. This was my first gain
from my illness. How little I had lost, when the wide world was so full
of delight for me.

My guardian intending to go back immediately, we appointed, on our
way down, a day when my dear girl should come. I wrote her a letter,
of which he took charge, and he left us within half an hour of our
arrival at our destination, on a delightful evening in the early summer-
time.

If a good fairy had built the house for me with a wave of her wand,
and I had been a princess and her favoured god-child, I could not
have been more considered in it. So many preparations were made for
me and such an endearing remembrance was shown of all my little
tastes and likings that I could have sat down, overcome, a dozen times
before I had revisited half the rooms. I did better than that, however,
by showing them all to Charley instead. Charley's delight calmed
mine; and after we had had a walk in the garden, and Charley had
exhausted her whole vocabulary of admiring expressions, I was as
tranquilly happy as I ought to have been. It was a great comfort to be
able to say to myself after tea, ‘Esther, my dear, I think you are quite
sensible enough to sit down now and write a note of thanks to your
host.’ He had left a note of welcome for me, as sunny as his own face,
and had confided his bird to my care, which I knew to be his highest
mark of confidence. Accordingly I wrote a little note to him in London,
telling him how all his favourite plants and trees were looking, and
how the most astonishing of birds had chirped the honours of the
house to me in the most hospitable manner, and how, after singing on
my shoulder, to the inconceivable rapture of my little maid, he was
then at roost in the usual corner of his cage, but whether dreaming or
no I could not report. My note finished and sent off to the post, I made
myself very busy in unpacking and arranging; and I sent Charley to
bed in good time and told her I should want her no more that night.

For I had not yet looked in the glass and had never asked to have my
own restored to me. I knew this to be a weakness which must be
overcome, but I had always said to myself that I would begin afresh
when I got to where I now was. Therefore I had wanted to be alone,
and therefore I said, now alone, in my own room, ‘sther, if you are to
be happy, if you are to have any right to pray to be true- hearted, you
must keep your word, my dear.’ I was quite resolved to keep it, but I
sat down for a little while first to reflect upon all my blessings. And
then I said my prayers and thought a little more. My hair had not
been cut off, though it had been in danger more than once. It was long
and thick. I let it down, and shook it out, and went up to the glass
upon the dressing-table. There was a little muslin curtain drawn
across it. I drew it back and stood for a moment looking through such
a veil of my own hair that I could see nothing else. Then I put my hair
aside and looked at the reflection in the mirror, encouraged by seeing
how placidly it looked at me. I was very much changed--oh, very, very
much. At first my face was so strange to me that I think I should have
put my hands before it and started back but for the encouragement I
have mentioned. Very soon it became more familiar, and then I knew
the extent of the alteration in it better than I had done at first. It was
not like what I had expected, but I had expected nothing definite, and
I dare say anything definite would have surprised me.

I had never been a beauty and had never thought myself one, but I
had been very different from this. It was all gone now. Heaven was so
good to me that I could let it go with a few not bitter tears and could
stand there arranging my hair for the night quite thankfully.

One thing troubled me, and I considered it for a long time before I
went to sleep. I had kept Mr Woodcourt's flowers. When they were
withered I had dried them and put them in a book that I was fond of.
Nobody knew this, not even Ada. I was doubtful whether I had a right
to preserve what he had sent to one so different--whether it was
generous towards him to do it. I wished to be generous to him, even in
the secret depths of my heart, which he would never know, because I
could have loved him--could have been devoted to him. At last I came
to the conclusion that I might keep them if I treasured them only as a
remembrance of what was irrevocably past and gone, never to be
looked back on any more, in any other light. I hope this may not seem
trivial. I was very much in earnest.

I took care to be up early in the morning and to be before the glass
when Charley came in on tiptoe.

‘Dear, dear, miss!’ cried Charley, starting. ‘Is that you?’

Yes, Charley,’ said I, quietly putting up my hair. ‘And I am very well
indeed, and very happy.’

I saw it was a weight off Charley's mind, but it was a greater weight off
mine. I knew the worst now and was composed to it. I shall not
conceal, as I go on, the weaknesses I could not quite conquer, but
they always passed from me soon and the happier frame of mind
stayed by me faithfully.
Wishing to be fully re-established in my strength and my good spirits
before Ada came, I now laid down a little series of plans with Charley
for being in the fresh air all day long. We were to be out before
breakfast, and were to dine early, and were to be out again before and
after dinner, and were to talk in the garden after tea, and were to go to
rest betimes, and were to climb every hill and explore every road, lane,
and field in the neighbourhood. As to restoratives and strengthening
delicacies, Mr Boythorn's good housekeeper was for ever trotting
about with something to eat or drink in her hand; I could not even be
heard of as resting in the park but she would come trotting after me
with a basket, her cheerful face shining with a lecture on the
importance of frequent nourishment. Then there was a pony expressly
for my riding, a chubby pony with a short neck and a mane all over
his eyes who could canter--when he would--so easily and quietly that
he was a treasure. In a very few days he would come to me in the
paddock when I called him, and eat out of my hand, and follow me
about. We arrived at such a capital understanding that when he was
jogging with me lazily, and rather obstinately, down some shady lane,
if I patted his neck and said, ‘Stubbs, I am surprised you don't canter
when you know how much I like it; and I think you might oblige me,
for you are only getting stupid and going to sleep,’ he would give his
head a comical shake or two and set off directly, while Charley would
stand still and laugh with such enjoyment that her laughter was like
music. I don't know who had given Stubbs his name, but it seemed to
belong to him as naturally as his rough coat. Once we put him in a
little chaise and drove him triumphantly through the green lanes for
five miles; but all at once, as we were extolling him to the skies, he
seemed to take it ill that he should have been accompanied so far by
the circle of tantalizing little gnats that had been hovering round and
round his ears the whole way without appearing to advance an inch,
and stopped to think about it. I suppose he came to the decision that
it was not to be borne, for he steadily refused to move until I gave the
reins to Charley and got out and walked, when he followed me with a
sturdy sort of good humour, putting his head under my arm and
rubbing his ear against my sleeve. It was in vain for me to say, ‘Now,
Stubbs, I feel quite sure from what I know of you that you will go on if
I ride a little while,’ for the moment I left him, he stood stock still
again. Consequently I was obliged to lead the way, as before; and in
this order we returned home, to the great delight of the village.

Charley and I had reason to call it the most friendly of villages, I am
sure, for in a week's time the people were so glad to see us go by,
though ever so frequently in the course of a day, that there were faces
of greeting in every cottage. I had known many of the grown people
before and almost all the children, but now the very steeple began to
wear a familiar and affectionate look. Among my new friends was an
old old woman who lived in such a little thatched and whitewashed
dwelling that when the outside shutter was turned up on its hinges, it
shut up the whole house-front. This old lady had a grandson who was
a sailor, and I wrote a letter to him for her and drew at the top of it the
chimney-corner in which she had brought him up and where his old
stool yet occupied its old place. This was considered by the whole
village the most wonderful achievement in the world, but when an
answer came back all the way from Plymouth, in which he mentioned
that he was going to take the picture all the way to America, and from
America would write again, I got all the credit that ought to have been
given to the post- office and was invested with the merit of the whole
system.

Thus, what with being so much in the air, playing with so many
children, gossiping with so many people, sitting on invitation in so
many cottages, going on with Charley's education, and writing long
letters to Ada every day, I had scarcely any time to think about that
little loss of mine and was almost always cheerful. If I did think of it at
odd moments now and then, I had only to be busy and forget it. I felt
it more than I had hoped I should once when a child said, ‘Mother,
why is the lady not a pretty lady now like she used to be?’ But when I
found the child was not less fond of me, and drew its soft hand over
my face with a kind of pitying protection in its touch, that soon set me
up again. There were many little occurrences which suggested to me,
with great consolation, how natural it is to gentle hearts to be
considerate and delicate towards any inferiority. One of these
particularly touched me. I happened to stroll into the little church
when a marriage was just concluded, and the young couple had to
sign the register.

The bridegroom, to whom the pen was handed first, made a rude
cross for his mark; the bride, who came next, did the same. Now, I
had known the bride when I was last there, not only as the prettiest
girl in the place, but as having quite distinguished herself in the
school, and I could not help looking at her with some surprise. She
came aside and whispered to me, while tears of honest love and
admiration stood in her bright eyes, ‘He's a dear good fellow, miss; but
he can't write yet--he's going to learn of me--and I wouldn't shame
him for the world!’ Why, what had I to fear, I thought, when there was
this nobility in the soul of a labouring man's daughter!

The air blew as freshly and revivingly upon me as it had ever blown,
and the healthy colour came into my new face as it had come into my
old one. Charley was wonderful to see, she was so radiant and so rosy;
and we both enjoyed the whole day and slept soundly the whole night.

There was a favourite spot of mine in the park-woods of Chesney Wold
where a seat had been erected commanding a lovely view. The wood
had been cleared and opened to improve this point of sight, and the
bright sunny landscape beyond was so beautiful that I rested there at
least once every day. A picturesque part of the Hall, called the Ghost's
Walk, was seen to advantage from this higher ground; and the
startling name, and the old legend in the Dedlock family which I had
heard from Mr Boythorn accounting for it, mingled with the view and
gave it something of a mysterious interest in addition to its real
charms. There was a bank here, too, which was a famous one for
violets; and as it was a daily delight of Charley's to gather wild flowers,
she took as much to the spot as I did.

It would be idle to inquire now why I never went close to the house or
never went inside it. The family were not there, I had heard on my
arrival, and were not expected. I was far from being incurious or
uninterested about the building; on the contrary, I often sat in this
place wondering how the rooms ranged and whether any echo like a
footstep really did resound at times, as the story said, upon the lonely
Ghost's Walk. The indefinable feeling with which Lady Dedlock had
impressed me may have had some influence in keeping me from the
house even when she was absent. I am not sure. Her face and figure
were associated with it, naturally; but I cannot say that they repelled
me from it, though something did. For whatever reason or no reason, I
had never once gone near it, down to the day at which my story now
arrives.

I was resting at my favourite point after a long ramble, and Charley
was gathering violets at a little distance from me. I had been looking
at the Ghost's Walk lying in a deep shade of masonry afar off and
picturing to myself the female shape that was said to haunt it when I
became aware of a figure approaching through the wood. The
perspective was so long and so darkened by leaves, and the shadows
of the branches on the ground made it so much more intricate to the
eye, that at first I could not discern what figure it was. By little and
little it revealed itself to be a woman's--a lady's--Lady Dedlock's. She
was alone and coming to where I sat with a much quicker step, I
observed to my surprise, than was usual with her.

I was fluttered by her being unexpectedly so near (she was almost
within speaking distance before I knew her) and would have risen to
continue my walk. But I could not. I was rendered motionless. Not so
much by her hurried gesture of entreaty, not so much by her quick
advance and outstretched hands, not so much by the great change in
her manner and the absence of her haughty self-restraint, as by a
something in her face that I had pined for and dreamed of when I was
a little child, something I had never seen in any face, something I had
never seen in hers before.

A dread and faintness fell upon me, and I called to Charley. Lady
Dedlock stopped upon the instant and changed back almost to what I
had known her.
‘Miss Summerson, I am afraid I have startled you,’ she said, now
advancing slowly. ‘You can scarcely be strong yet. You have been very
ill, I know. I have been much concerned to hear it.’

I could no more have removed my eyes from her pale face than I could
have stirred from the bench on which I sat. She gave me her hand,
and its deadly coldness, so at variance with the enforced composure of
her features, deepened the fascination that overpowered me. I cannot
say what was in my whirling thoughts.

‘You are recovering again?’ she asked kindly.

T was quite well but a moment ago, Lady Dedlock.’

Ts this your young attendant?’

‘Yes.’

‘Will you send her on before and walk towards your house with me?’

‘Charley,’ said I, ‘take your flowers home, and I will follow you
directly.’

Charley, with her best curtsy, blushingly tied on her bonnet and went
her way. When she was gone, Lady Dedlock sat down on the seat
beside me.

I cannot tell in any words what the state of my mind was when I saw
in her hand my handkerchief with which I had covered the dead baby.

I looked at her, but I could not see her, I could not hear her, I could
not draw my breath. The beating of my heart was so violent and wild
that I felt as if my life were breaking from me. But when she caught
me to her breast, kissed me, wept over me, compassionated me, and
called me back to myself; when she fell down on her knees and cried
to me, ‘Oh, my child, my child, I am your wicked and unhappy
mother! Oh, try to forgive me!’--when I saw her at my feet on the bare
earth in her great agony of mind, I felt, through all my tumult of
emotion, a burst of gratitude to the providence of God that I was so
changed as that I never could disgrace her by any trace of likeness, as
that nobody could ever now look at me and look at her and remotely
think of any near tie between us.

I raised my mother up, praying and beseeching her not to stoop before
me in such affliction and humiliation. I did so in broken, incoherent
words, for besides the trouble I was in, it frightened me to see her at
MY feet. I told her--or I tried to tell her--that if it were for me, her
child, under any circumstances to take upon me to forgive her, I did
it, and had done it, many, many years. I told her that my heart
overflowed with love for her, that it was natural love which nothing in
the past had changed or could change. That it was not for me, then
resting for the first time on my mother's bosom, to take her to account
for having given me life, but that my duty was to bless her and receive
her, though the whole world turned from her, and that I only asked
her leave to do it. I held my mother in my embrace, and she held me
in hers, and among the still woods in the silence of the summer day
there seemed to be nothing but our two troubled minds that was not
at peace.

‘To bless and receive me,’ groaned my mother, ‘it is far too late. I must
travel my dark road alone, and it will lead me where it will. From day
to day, sometimes from hour to hour, I do not see the way before my
guilty feet. This is the earthly punishment I have brought upon
myself. I bear it, and I hide it.’

Even in the thinking of her endurance, she drew her habitual air of
proud indifference about her like a veil, though she soon cast it off
again.

T must keep this secret, if by any means it can be kept, not wholly for
myself. I have a husband, wretched and dishonouring creature that I
am!’

These words she uttered with a suppressed cry of despair, more
terrible in its sound than any shriek. Covering her face with her
hands, she shrank down in my embrace as if she were unwilling that I
should touch her; nor could I, by my utmost persuasions or by any
endearments I could use, prevail upon her to rise. She said, no, no,
no, she could only speak to me so; she must be proud and disdainful
everywhere else; she would be humbled and ashamed there, in the
only natural moments of her life.

My unhappy mother told me that in my illness she had been nearly
frantic. She had but then known that her child was living. She could
not have suspected me to be that child before. She had followed me
down here to speak to me but once in all her life. We never could
associate, never could communicate, never probably from that time
forth could interchange another word on earth. She put into my hands
a letter she had written for my reading only and said when I had read
it and destroyed it--but not so much for her sake, since she asked
nothing, as for her husband's and my own--I must evermore consider
her as dead. If I could believe that she loved me, in this agony in
which I saw her, with a mother's love, she asked me to do that, for
then I might think of her with a greater pity, imagining what she
suffered. She had put herself beyond all hope and beyond all help.
Whether she preserved her secret until death or it came to be
discovered and she brought dishonour and disgrace upon the name
she had taken, it was her solitary struggle always; and no affection
could come near her, and no human creature could render her any
aid.

‘But is the secret safe so far?’ I asked. ‘Is it safe now, dearest mother?’
‘No,’ replied my mother. It has been very near discovery. It was saved
by an accident. It may be lost by another accident--to- morrow, any
day.’

‘Do you dread a particular person?’

‘Hush! Do not tremble and cry so much for me. I am not worthy of
these tears,’ said my mother, kissing my hands. T dread one person
very much.’

‘An enemy?’

‘Not a friend. One who is too passionless to be either. He is Sir
Leicester Dedlock's lawyer, mechanically faithful without attachment,
and very jealous of the profit, privilege, and reputation of being master
of the mysteries of great houses.’

‘Has he any suspicions?’

‘Many.’

‘Not of you?’ I said alarmed.

‘Yes! He is always vigilant and always near me. I may keep him at a
standstill, but I can never shake him off.’

‘Has he so little pity or compunction?’

‘He has none, and no anger. He is indifferent to everything but his
calling. His calling is the acquisition of secrets and the holding
possession of such power as they give him, with no sharer or
opponent in it.’

‘Could you trust in him?’

T shall never try. The dark road I have trodden for so many years will
end where it will. I follow it alone to the end, whatever the end be. It
may be near, it may be distant; while the road lasts, nothing turns

me.’

‘Dear mother, are you so resolved?’
T AM resolved. I have long outbidden folly with folly, pride with pride,
scorn with scorn, insolence with insolence, and have outlived many
vanities with many more. I will outlive this danger, and outdie it, if I
can. It has closed around me almost as awfully as if these woods of
Chesney Wold had closed around the house, but my course through it
is the same. I have but one; I can have but one.’

‘Mr Jarndyce--’ I was beginning when my mother hurriedly inquired,
‘Does HE suspect?’

‘No,’ said I. ‘No, indeed! Be assured that he does not!’ And I told her
what he had related to me as his knowledge of my story. ‘But he is so
good and sensible,’ said I, ‘that perhaps if he knew--’

My mother, who until this time had made no change in her position,
raised her hand up to my lips and stopped me.

‘Confide fully in him,’ she said after a little while. ‘You have my free
consent--a small gift from such a mother to her injured child!--but do
not tell me of it. Some pride is left in me even yet.’

I explained, as nearly as I could then, or can recall now--for my
agitation and distress throughout were so great that I scarcely
understood myself, though every word that was uttered in the
mother's voice, so unfamiliar and so melancholy to me, which in my
childhood I had never learned to love and recognize, had never been
sung to sleep with, had never heard a blessing from, had never had a
hope inspired by, made an enduring impression on my memory--I say
I explained, or tried to do it, how I had only hoped that Mr Jarndyce,
who had been the best of fathers to me, might be able to afford some
counsel and support to her. But my mother answered no, it was
impossible; no one could help her. Through the desert that lay before
her, she must go alone.

‘My child, my child!’ she said. ‘For the last time! These kisses for the
last time! These arms upon my neck for the last time! We shall meet
no more. To hope to do what I seek to do, I must be what I have been
so long. Such is my reward and doom. If you hear of Lady Dedlock,
brilliant, prosperous, and flattered, think of your wretched mother,
conscience-stricken, underneath that mask! Think that the reality is
in her suffering, in her useless remorse, in her murdering within her
breast the only love and truth of which it is capable! And then forgive
her if you can, and cry to heaven to forgive her, which it never can!’

We held one another for a little space yet, but she was so firm that she
took my hands away, and put them back against my breast, and with
a last kiss as she held them there, released them, and went from me
into the wood. I was alone, and calm and quiet below me in the sun
and shade lay the old house, with its terraces and turrets, on which
there had seemed to me to be such complete repose when I first saw
it, but which now looked like the obdurate and unpitying watcher of
my mother's misery.

Stunned as I was, as weak and helpless at first as I had ever been in
my sick chamber, the necessity of guarding against the danger of
discovery, or even of the remotest suspicion, did me service. I took
such precautions as I could to hide from Charley that I had been
crying, and I constrained myself to think of every sacred obligation
that there was upon me to be careful and collected. It was not a little
while before I could succeed or could even restrain bursts of grief, but
after an hour or so I was better and felt that I might return. I went
home very slowly and told Charley, whom I found at the gate looking
for me, that I had been tempted to extend my walk after Lady Dedlock
had left me and that I was over-tired and would lie down. Safe in my
own room, I read the letter. I clearly derived from it--and that was
much then--that I had not been abandoned by my mother. Her elder
and only sister, the godmother of my childhood, discovering signs of
life in me when I had been laid aside as dead, had in her stern sense
of duty, with no desire or willingness that I should live, reared me in
rigid secrecy and had never again beheld my mother's face from within
a few hours of my birth. So strangely did I hold my place in this world
that until within a short time back I had never, to my own mother's
knowledge, breathed--had been buried--had never been endowed with
life--had never borne a name. When she had first seen me in the
church she had been startled and had thought of what would have
been like me if it had ever lived, and had lived on, but that was all
then.

What more the letter told me needs not to be repeated here. It has its
own times and places in my story.

My first care was to burn what my mother had written and to
consume even its ashes. I hope it may not appear very unnatural or
bad in me that I then became heavily sorrowful to think I had ever
been reared. That I felt as if I knew it would have been better and
happier for many people if indeed I had never breathed. That I had a
terror of myself as the danger and the possible disgrace of my own
mother and of a proud family name. That I was so confused and
shaken as to be possessed by a belief that it was right and had been
intended that I should die in my birth, and that it was wrong and not
intended that I should be then alive.

These are the real feelings that I had. I fell asleep worn out, and when
I awoke I cried afresh to think that I was back in the world with my
load of trouble for others. I was more than ever frightened of myself,
thinking anew of her against whom I was a witness, of the owner of
Chesney Wold, of the new and terrible meaning of the old words now
moaning in my ear like a surge upon the shore, ‘Your mother, Esther,
was your disgrace, and you are hers. The time will come--and soon
enough--when you will understand this better, and will feel it too, as
no one save a woman can.’ With them, those other words returned,
‘Pray daily that the sins of others be not visited upon your head.’ I
could not disentangle all that was about me, and I felt as if the blame
and the shame were all in me, and the visitation had come down.

The day waned into a gloomy evening, overcast and sad, and I still
contended with the same distress. I went out alone, and after walking
a little in the park, watching the dark shades falling on the trees and
the fitful flight of the bats, which sometimes almost touched me, was
attracted to the house for the first time. Perhaps I might not have gone
near it if I had been in a stronger frame of mind. As it was, I took the
path that led close by it.

I did not dare to linger or to look up, but I passed before the terrace
garden with its fragrant odours, and its broad walks, and its well-kept
beds and smooth turf; and I saw how beautiful and grave it was, and
how the old stone balustrades and parapets, and wide flights of
shallow steps, were seamed by time and weather; and how the trained
moss and ivy grew about them, and around the old stone pedestal of
the sun-dial; and I heard the fountain falling. Then the way went by
long lines of dark windows diversified by turreted towers and porches
of eccentric shapes, where old stone lions and grotesque monsters
bristled outside dens of shadow and snarled at the evening gloom over
the escutcheons they held in their grip. Thence the path wound
underneath a gateway, and through a court-yard where the principal
entrance was (I hurried quickly on), and by the stables where none
but deep voices seemed to be, whether in the murmuring of the wind
through the strong mass of ivy holding to a high red wall, or in the low
complaining of the weathercock, or in the barking of the dogs, or in
the slow striking of a clock. So, encountering presently a sweet smell
of limes, whose rustling I could hear, I turned with the turning of the
path to the south front, and there above me were the balustrades of
the Ghost's Walk and one lighted window that might be my mother's.

The way was paved here, like the terrace overhead, and my footsteps
from being noiseless made an echoing sound upon the flags. Stopping
to look at nothing, but seeing all I did see as I went, I was passing
quickly on, and in a few moments should have passed the lighted
window, when my echoing footsteps brought it suddenly into my mind
that there was a dreadful truth in the legend of the Ghost's Walk, that
it was I who was to bring calamity upon the stately house and that my
warning feet were haunting it even then. Seized with an augmented
terror of myself which turned me cold, I ran from myself and
everything, retraced the way by which I had come, and never paused
until I had gained the lodge-gate, and the park lay sullen and black
behind me.

Not before I was alone in my own room for the night and had again
been dejected and unhappy there did I begin to know how wrong and
thankless this state was. But from my darling who was coming on the
morrow, I found a joyful letter, full of such loving anticipation that I
must have been of marble if it had not moved me; from my guardian,
too, I found another letter, asking me to tell Dame Durden, if I should
see that little woman anywhere, that they had moped most pitiably
without her, that the housekeeping was going to rack and ruin, that
nobody else could manage the keys, and that everybody in and about
the house declared it was not the same house and was becoming
rebellious for her return. Two such letters together made me think
how far beyond my deserts I was beloved and how happy I ought to
be. That made me think of all my past life; and that brought me, as it
ought to have done before, into a better condition.

For I saw very well that I could not have been intended to die, or I
should never have lived; not to say should never have been reserved
for such a happy life. I saw very well how many things had worked
together for my welfare, and that if the sins of the fathers were
sometimes visited upon the children, the phrase did not mean what I
had in the morning feared it meant. I knew I was as innocent of my
birth as a queen of hers and that before my Heavenly Father I should
not be punished for birth nor a queen rewarded for it. I had had
experience, in the shock of that very day, that I could, even thus soon,
find comforting reconcilements to the change that had fallen on me. I
renewed my resolutions and prayed to be strengthened in them,
pouring out my heart for myself and for my unhappy mother and
feeling that the darkness of the morning was passing away. It was not
upon my sleep; and when the next day's light awoke me, it was gone.

My dear girl was to arrive at five o'clock in the afternoon. How to help
myself through the intermediate time better than by taking a long
walk along the road by which she was to come, I did not know; so
Charley and I and Stubbs--Stubbs saddled, for we never drove him
after the one great occasion--made a long expedition along that road
and back. On our return, we held a great review of the house and
garden and saw that everything was in its prettiest condition, and had
the bird out ready as an important part of the establishment.

There were more than two full hours yet to elapse before she could
come, and in that interval, which seemed a long one, I must confess I
was nervously anxious about my altered looks. I loved my darling so
well that I was more concerned for their effect on her than on any one.
I was not in this slight distress because I at all repined--I am quite
certain I did not, that day--but, I thought, would she be wholly
prepared? When she first saw me, might she not be a little shocked
and disappointed? Might it not prove a little worse than she expected?
Might she not look for her old Esther and not find her? Might she not
have to grow used to me and to begin all over again?

I knew the various expressions of my sweet girl's face so well, and it
was such an honest face in its loveliness, that I was sure beforehand
she could not hide that first look from me. And I considered whether,
if it should signify any one of these meanings, which was so very
likely, could I quite answer for myself?

Well, I thought I could. After last night, I thought I could. But to wait
and wait, and expect and expect, and think and think, was such bad
preparation that I resolved to go along the road again and meet her.

So I said to Charley, ‘Charley, I will go by myself and walk along the
road until she comes.’ Charley highly approving of anything that
pleased me, I went and left her at home.

But before I got to the second milestone, I had been in so many
palpitations from seeing dust in the distance (though I knew it was
not, and could not, be the coach yet) that I resolved to turn back and
go home again. And when I had turned, I was in such fear of the
coach coming up behind me (though I still knew that it neither would,
nor could, do any such thing) that I ran the greater part of the way to
avoid being overtaken.

Then, I considered, when I had got safe back again, this was a nice
thing to have done! Now I was hot and had made the worst of it
instead of the best.

At last, when I believed there was at least a quarter of an hour more
yet, Charley all at once cried out to me as I was trembling in the
garden, ‘Here she comes, miss! Here she is!’

I did not mean to do it, but I ran upstairs into my room and hid
myself behind the door. There I stood trembling, even when I heard
my darling calling as she came upstairs, ‘Esther, my dear, my love,
where are you? Little woman, dear Dame Durden!’

She ran in, and was running out again when she saw me. Ah, my
angel girl! The old dear look, all love, all fondness, all affection.
Nothing else in it--no, nothing, nothing!

Oh, how happy I was, down upon the floor, with my sweet beautiful
girl down upon the floor too, holding my scarred face to her lovely
cheek, bathing it with tears and kisses, rocking me to and fro like a
child, calling me by every tender name that she could think of, and
pressing me to her faithful heart.
Chapter XXXVII - Jarndyce and Jarndyce

If the secret I had to keep had been mine, I must have confided it to
Ada before we had been long together. But it was not mine, and I did
not feel that I had a right to tell it, even to my guardian, unless some
great emergency arose. It was a weight to bear alone; still my present
duty appeared to be plain, and blest in the attachment of my dear, I
did not want an impulse and encouragement to do it. Though often
when she was asleep and all was quiet, the remembrance of my
mother kept me waking and made the night sorrowful, I did not yield
to it at another time; and Ada found me what I used to be--except, of
course, in that particular of which I have said enough and which I
have no intention of mentioning any more just now, if I can help it.

The difficulty that I felt in being quite composed that first evening
when Ada asked me, over our work, if the family were at the house,
and when I was obliged to answer yes, I believed so, for Lady Dedlock
had spoken to me in the woods the day before yesterday, was great.
Greater still when Ada asked me what she had said, and when I
replied that she had been kind and interested, and when Ada, while
admitting her beauty and elegance, remarked upon her proud manner
and her imperious chilling air. But Charley helped me through,
unconsciously, by telling us that Lady Dedlock had only stayed at the
house two nights on her way from London to visit at some other great
house in the next county and that she had left early on the morning
after we had seen her at our view, as we called it. Charley verified the
adage about little pitchers, I am sure, for she heard of more sayings
and doings in a day than would have come to my ears in a month.

We were to stay a month at Mr Boythorn's. My pet had scarcely been
there a bright week, as I recollect the time, when one evening after we
had finished helping the gardener in watering his flowers, and just as
the candles were lighted, Charley, appearing with a very important air
behind Ada's chair, beckoned me mysteriously out of the room.

‘Oh! If you please, miss,’ said Charley in a whisper, with her eyes at
their roundest and largest. ‘You're wanted at the Dedlock Arms.’

‘Why, Charley,’ said I, ‘who can possibly want me at the public-
house?’

T don't know, miss,’ returned Charley, putting her head forward and
folding her hands tight upon the band of her little apron, which she
always did in the enjoyment of anything mysterious or confidential,
‘but it's a gentleman, miss, and his compliments, and will you please
to come without saying anything about it.’

‘Whose compliments, Charley?’
‘His'n, miss,’ returned Charley, whose grammatical education was
advancing, but not very rapidly.

‘And how do you come to be the messenger, Charley?’

T am not the messenger, if you please, miss,’ returned my little maid.
It was W. Grubble, miss.’

‘And who is W. Grubble, Charley?’

‘Mister Grubble, miss,’ returned Charley. ‘Don't you know, miss? The
Dedlock Arms, by W. Grubble,’ which Charley delivered as if she were
slowly spelling out the sign.

‘Aye? The landlord, Charley?’

‘Yes, miss. If you please, miss, his wife is a beautiful woman, but she
broke her ankle, and it never joined. And her brother's the sawyer that
was put in the cage, miss, and they expect he'll drink himself to death
entirely on beer,’ said Charley.

Not knowing what might be the matter, and being easily apprehensive
now, I thought it best to go to this place by myself. I bade Charley be
quick with my bonnet and veil and my shawl, and having put them
on, went away down the little hilly street, where I was as much at
home as in Mr Boythorn's garden.

Mr Grubble was standing in his shirt-sleeves at the door of his very
clean little tavern waiting for me. He lifted off his hat with both hands
when he saw me coming, and carrying it so, as if it were an iron vessel
(it looked as heavy), preceded me along the sanded passage to his best
parlour, a neat carpeted room with more plants in it than were quite
convenient, a coloured print of Queen Caroline, several shells, a good
many tea-trays, two stuffed and dried fish in glass cases, and either a
curious egg or a curious pumpkin (but I don't know which, and I
doubt if many people did) hanging from his ceiling. I knew Mr Grubble
very well by sight, from his often standing at his door. A pleasant-
looking, stoutish, middle-aged man who never seemed to consider
himself cozily dressed for his own fire-side without his hat and top-
boots, but who never wore a coat except at church.

He snuffed the candle, and backing away a little to see how it looked,
backed out of the room--unexpectedly to me, for I was going to ask
him by whom he had been sent. The door of the opposite parlour
being then opened, I heard some voices, familiar in my ears I thought,
which stopped. A quick light step approached the room in which I
was, and who should stand before me but Richard!
‘My dear Esther!’ he said. “My best friend!’ And he really was so warm-
hearted and earnest that in the first surprise and pleasure of his
brotherly greeting I could scarcely find breath to tell him that Ada was
well.

‘Answering my very thoughts--always the same dear girl!’ said
Richard, leading me to a chair and seating himself beside me.

I put my veil up, but not quite.
‘Always the same dear girl!’ said Richard just as heartily as before.

I put up my veil altogether, and laying my hand on Richard's sleeve
and looking in his face, told him how much I thanked him for his kind
welcome and how greatly I rejoiced to see him, the more so because of
the determination I had made in my illness, which I now conveyed to
him.

‘My love,’ said Richard, ‘there is no one with whom I have a greater
wish to talk than you, for I want you to understand me.’

‘And I want you, Richard,’ said I, shaking my head, ‘to understand
some one else.’

‘Since you refer so immediately to John Jarndyce,’ said Richard, ‘--I
suppose you mean him?’

‘Of course I do.’

Then I may say at once that I am glad of it, because it is on that
subject that I am anxious to be understood. By you, mind--you, my
dear! Iam not accountable to Mr Jarndyce or Mr Anybody.’

I was pained to find him taking this tone, and he observed it.

‘Well, well, my dear,’ said Richard, ‘we won't go into that now. I want
to appear quietly in your country-house here, with you under my arm,
and give my charming cousin a surprise. I suppose your loyalty to
John Jarndyce will allow that?’

‘My dear Richard,’ I returned, ‘you know you would be heartily
welcome at his house--your home, if you will but consider it so; and
you are as heartily welcome here!’

‘Spoken like the best of little women!’ cried Richard gaily.

I asked him how he liked his profession.
‘Oh, I like it well enough!’ said Richard. ‘t's all right. It does as well as
anything else, for a time. I don't know that I shall care about it when I
come to be settled, but I can sell out then and--however, never mind
all that botheration at present.’

So young and handsome, and in all respects so perfectly the opposite
of Miss Flite! And yet, in the clouded, eager, seeking look that passed
over him, so dreadfully like her!

T am in town on leave just now,’ said Richard.
‘Indeed?’

‘Yes. I have run over to look after my--my Chancery interests before
the long vacation,’ said Richard, forcing a careless laugh. ‘We are
beginning to spin along with that old suit at last, I promise you.’

No wonder that I shook my head!

‘AS you say, it's not a pleasant subject.’ Richard spoke with the same
shade crossing his face as before. ‘Let it go to the four winds for to-
night. Puff! Gone! Who do you suppose is with me?’

‘Was it Mr Skimpole's voice I heard?’

That's the man! He does me more good than anybody. What a
fascinating child it is!’

I asked Richard if any one knew of their coming down together. He
answered, no, nobody. He had been to call upon the dear old infant--
so he called Mr Skimpole--and the dear old infant had told him where
we were, and he had told the dear old infant he was bent on coming to
see us, and the dear old infant had directly wanted to come too; and
so he had brought him. ‘And he is worth--not to say his sordid
expenses--but thrice his weight in gold,’ said Richard. ‘He is such a
cheery fellow. No worldliness about him. Fresh and green-hearted!’

I certainly did not see the proof of Mr Skimpole's worldliness in his
having his expenses paid by Richard, but I made no remark about
that. Indeed, he came in and turned our conversation. He was
charmed to see me, said he had been shedding delicious tears of joy
and sympathy at intervals for six weeks on my account, had never
been so happy as in hearing of my progress, began to understand the
mixture of good and evil in the world now, felt that he appreciated
health the more when somebody else was ill, didn't know but what it
might be in the scheme of things that A should squint to make B
happier in looking straight or that C should carry a wooden leg to
make D better satisfied with his flesh and blood in a silk stocking.
‘My dear Miss Summerson, here is our friend Richard,’ said Mr
Skimpole, ‘full of the brightest visions of the future, which he evokes
out of the darkness of Chancery. Now that's delightful, that's
inspiriting, that's full of poetry! In old times the woods and solitudes
were made joyous to the shepherd by the imaginary piping and
dancing of Pan and the nymphs. This present shepherd, our pastoral
Richard, brightens the dull Inns of Court by making Fortune and her
train sport through them to the melodious notes of a judgment from
the bench. That's very pleasant, you know! Some ill-conditioned
growling fellow may say to me, 'What's the use of these legal and
equitable abuses? How do you defend them?’ I reply, 'My growling
friend, I DON'T defend them, but they are very agreeable to me. There
is a shepherd--youth, a friend of mine, who transmutes them into
something highly fascinating to my simplicity. I don't say it is for this
that they exist--for I am a child among you worldly grumblers, and not
called upon to account to you or myself for anything--but it may be
so."

I began seriously to think that Richard could scarcely have found a
worse friend than this. It made me uneasy that at such a time when
he most required some right principle and purpose he should have
this captivating looseness and putting-off of everything, this airy
dispensing with all principle and purpose, at his elbow. I thought I
could understand how such a nature as my guardian's, experienced in
the world and forced to contemplate the miserable evasions and
contentions of the family misfortune, found an immense relief in Mr
Skimpole's avowal of his weaknesses and display of guileless candour;
but I could not satisfy myself that it was as artless as it seemed or
that it did not serve Mr Skimpole's idle turn quite as well as any other
part, and with less trouble.

They both walked back with me, and Mr Skimpole leaving us at the
gate, I walked softly in with Richard and said, ‘Ada, my love, I have
brought a gentleman to visit you.’ It was not difficult to read the
blushing, startled face. She loved him dearly, and he knew it, and I
knew it. It was a very transparent business, that meeting as cousins
only.

I almost mistrusted myself as growing quite wicked in my suspicions,
but I was not so sure that Richard loved her dearly. He admired her
very much--any one must have done that--and I dare say would have
renewed their youthful engagement with great pride and ardour but
that he knew how she would respect her promise to my guardian. Still
I had a tormenting idea that the influence upon him extended even
here, that he was postponing his best truth and earnestness in this as
in all things until Jarndyce and Jarndyce should be off his mind. Ah
me! What Richard would have been without that blight, I never shall
know now!
He told Ada, in his most ingenuous way, that he had not come to
make any secret inroad on the terms she had accepted (rather too
implicitly and confidingly, he thought) from Mr Jarndyce, that he had
come openly to see her and to see me and to justify himself for the
present terms on which he stood with Mr Jarndyce. As the dear old
infant would be with us directly, he begged that I would make an
appointment for the morning, when he might set himself right through
the means of an unreserved conversation with me. I proposed to walk
with him in the park at seven o'clock, and this was arranged. Mr
Skimpole soon afterwards appeared and made us merry for an hour.
He particularly requested to see little Coavinses (meaning Charley)
and told her, with a patriarchal air, that he had given her late father
all the business in his power and that if one of her little brothers
would make haste to get set up in the same profession, he hoped he
should still be able to put a good deal of employment in his way.

‘For I am constantly being taken in these nets,’ said Mr Skimpole,
looking beamingly at us over a glass of wine-and-water, ‘and am
constantly being bailed out--like a boat. Or paid off--like a ship's
company. Somebody always does it for me. I can't do it, you know, for
I never have any money. But somebody does it. I get out by
somebody's means; I am not like the starling; I get out. If you were to
ask me who somebody is, upon my word I couldn't tell you. Let us
drink to somebody. God bless him!’

Richard was a little late in the morning, but I had not to wait for him
long, and we turned into the park. The air was bright and dewy and
the sky without a cloud. The birds sang delightfully; the sparkles in
the fern, the grass, and trees, were exquisite to see; the richness of the
woods seemed to have increased twenty-fold since yesterday, as if, in
the still night when they had looked so massively hushed in sleep,
Nature, through all the minute details of every wonderful leaf, had
been more wakeful than usual for the glory of that day.

‘This is a lovely place,’ said Richard, looking round. ‘None of the jar
and discord of law-suits here!’

But there was other trouble.

T tell you what, my dear girl,’ said Richard, ‘when I get affairs in
general settled, I shall come down here, I think, and rest.’

‘Would it not be better to rest now?’ I asked.
‘Oh, as to resting NOW,’ said Richard, ‘or as to doing anything very

definite NOW, that's not easy. In short, it can't be done; I can't do it at
least.’
‘Why not?’ said I.

‘You know why not, Esther. If you were living in an unfinished house,
liable to have the roof put on or taken off--to be from top to bottom
pulled down or built up--to-morrow, next day, next week, next month,
next year--you would find it hard to rest or settle. So do I. Now?
There's no now for us suitors.’

I could almost have believed in the attraction on which my poor little
wandering friend had expatiated when I saw again the darkened look
of last night. Terrible to think it had in it also a shade of that
unfortunate man who had died.

‘My dear Richard,’ said I, ‘this is a bad beginning of our conversation.’
T knew you would tell me so, Dame Durden.’

‘And not I alone, dear Richard. It was not I who cautioned you once
never to found a hope or expectation on the family curse.’

‘There you come back to John Jarndyce!’ said Richard impatiently.
‘Well! We must approach him sooner or later, for he is the staple of
what I have to say, and it's as well at once. My dear Esther, how can
you be so blind? Don't you see that he is an interested party and that
it may be very well for him to wish me to know nothing of the suit,
and care nothing about it, but that it may not be quite so well for me?’

‘Oh, Richard,’ I remonstrated, ‘is it possible that you can ever have
seen him and heard him, that you can ever have lived under his roof
and known him, and can yet breathe, even to me in this solitary place
where there is no one to hear us, such unworthy suspicions?’

He reddened deeply, as if his natural generosity felt a pang of
reproach. He was silent for a little while before he replied in a
subdued voice, ‘Esther, I am sure you know that I am not a mean
fellow and that I have some sense of suspicion and distrust being poor
qualities in one of my years.’

‘T know it very well,’ said I. Tam not more sure of anything.’

‘That's a dear girl,’ retorted Richard, ‘and like you, because it gives me
comfort. I had need to get some scrap of comfort out of all this
business, for it's a bad one at the best, as I have no occasion to tell

?

you.

T know perfectly,’ said I. I know as well, Richard--what shall I say? as
well as you do--that such misconstructions are foreign to your nature.
And I know, as well as you know, what so changes it.’
‘Come, sister, come,’ said Richard a little more gaily, ‘you will be fair
with me at all events. If I have the misfortune to be under that
influence, so has he. If it has a little twisted me, it may have a little
twisted him too. I don't say that he is not an honourable man, out of
all this complication and uncertainty; I am sure he is. But it taints
everybody. You know it taints everybody. You have heard him say so
fifty times. Then why should HE escape?’

‘Because,’ said I, ‘this is an uncommon character, and he has
resolutely kept himself outside the circle, Richard.’

‘Oh, because and because!’ replied Richard in his vivacious way. I am
not sure, my dear girl, but that it may be wise and specious to
preserve that outward indifference. It may cause other parties
interested to become lax about their interests; and people may die off,
and points may drag themselves out of memory, and many things may
smoothly happen that are convenient enough.’

I was so touched with pity for Richard that I could not reproach him
any more, even by a look. I remembered my guardian's gentleness
towards his errors and with what perfect freedom from resentment he
had spoken of them.

‘Esther,’ Richard resumed, ‘you are not to suppose that I have come
here to make underhanded charges against John Jarndyce. I have
only come to justify myself. What I say is, it was all very well and we
got on very well while I was a boy, utterly regardless of this same suit;
but as soon as I began to take an interest in it and to look into it, then
it was quite another thing. Then John Jarndyce discovers that Ada
and I must break off and that if I don't amend that very objectionable
course, I am not fit for her. Now, Esther, I don't mean to amend that
very objectionable course: I will not hold John Jarndyce's favour on
those unfair terms of compromise, which he has no right to dictate.
Whether it pleases him or displeases him, I must maintain my rights
and Ada's. I have been thinking about it a good deal, and this is the
conclusion I have come to.’

Poor dear Richard! He had indeed been thinking about it a good deal.
His face, his voice, his manner, all showed that too plainly.

‘So I tell him honourably (you are to know I have written to him about
all this) that we are at issue and that we had better be at issue openly
than covertly. I thank him for his goodwill and his protection, and he
goes his road, and I go mine. The fact is, our roads are not the same.
Under one of the wills in dispute, I should take much more than he. I
don't mean to say that it is the one to be established, but there it is,
and it has its chance.’
T have not to learn from you, my dear Richard,’ said I, ‘of your letter. I
had heard of it already without an offended or angry word.’

‘Indeed?’ replied Richard, softening. I am glad I said he was an
honourable man, out of all this wretched affair. But I always say that
and have never doubted it. Now, my dear Esther, I know these views
of mine appear extremely harsh to you, and will to Ada when you tell
her what has passed between us. But if you had gone into the case as
I have, if you had only applied yourself to the papers as I did when I
was at Kenge's, if you only knew what an accumulation of charges and
counter-charges, and suspicions and cross-suspicions, they involve,
you would think me moderate in comparison.’

‘Perhaps so,’ said I. ‘But do you think that, among those many papers,
there is much truth and justice, Richard?’

‘There is truth and justice somewhere in the case, Esther--’
‘Or was once, long ago,’ said I.

‘Ts--is--must be somewhere,’ pursued Richard impetuously, ‘and must
be brought out. To allow Ada to be made a bribe and hush-money of is
not the way to bring it out. You say the suit is changing me; John
Jarndyce says it changes, has changed, and will change everybody
who has any share in it. Then the greater right I have on my side
when I resolve to do all I can to bring it to an end.’

‘All you can, Richard! Do you think that in these many years no others
have done all they could? Has the difficulty grown easier because of so
many failures?’

Tt can't last for ever,’ returned Richard with a fierceness kindling in
him which again presented to me that last sad reminder. I am young
and earnest, and energy and determination have done wonders many
a time. Others have only half thrown themselves into it. I devote
myself to it. I make it the object of my life.’

‘Oh, Richard, my dear, so much the worse, so much the worse!’

‘No, no, no, don't you be afraid for me,’ he returned affectionately.
‘You're a dear, good, wise, quiet, blessed girl; but you have your
prepossessions. So I come round to John Jarndyce. I tell you, my good
Esther, when he and I were on those terms which he found so
convenient, we were not on natural terms.’

‘Are division and animosity your natural terms, Richard?’
‘No, I don't say that. I mean that all this business puts us on
unnatural terms, with which natural relations are incompatible. See
another reason for urging it on! I may find out when it's over that I
have been mistaken in John Jarndyce. My head may be clearer when I
am free of it, and I may then agree with what you say to- day. Very
well. Then I shall acknowledge it and make him reparation.’

Everything postponed to that imaginary time! Everything held in
confusion and indecision until then!

‘Now, my best of confidantes,’ said Richard, ‘I want my cousin Ada to
understand that I am not captious, fickle, and wilful about John
Jarndyce, but that I have this purpose and reason at my back. I wish
to represent myself to her through you, because she has a great
esteem and respect for her cousin John; and I know you will soften
the course I take, even though you disapprove of it; and-- and in
short,’ said Richard, who had been hesitating through these words, ‘T-
-I don't like to represent myself in this litigious, contentious, doubting
character to a confiding girl like Ada.’

I told him that he was more like himself in those latter words than in
anything he had said yet.

‘Why,’ acknowledged Richard, ‘that may be true enough, my love. I
rather feel it to be so. But I shall be able to give myself fair- play by
and by. I shall come all right again, then, don't you be afraid.’

I asked him if this were all he wished me to tell Ada.

‘Not quite,’ said Richard. ‘I am bound not to withhold from her that
John Jarndyce answered my letter in his usual manner, addressing
me as 'My dear Rick,' trying to argue me out of my opinions, and
telling me that they should make no difference in him. (All very well of
course, but not altering the case.) I also want Ada to know that if I see
her seldom just now, I am looking after her interests as well as my
own--we two being in the same boat exactly--and that I hope she will
not suppose from any flying rumours she may hear that I am at all
light-headed or imprudent; on the contrary, I am always looking
forward to the termination of the suit, and always planning in that
direction. Being of age now and having taken the step I have taken, I
consider myself free from any accountability to John Jarndyce; but
Ada being still a ward of the court, I don't yet ask her to renew our
engagement. When she is free to act for herself, I shall be myself once
more and we shall both be in very different worldly circumstances, I
believe. If you tell her all this with the advantage of your considerate
way, you will do me a very great and a very kind service, my dear
Esther; and I shall knock Jarndyce and Jarndyce on the head with
greater vigour. Of course I ask for no secrecy at Bleak House.’
‘Richard,’ said I, ‘you place great confidence in me, but I fear you will
not take advice from me?’

It's impossible that I can on this subject, my dear girl. On any other,
readily.’

As if there were any other in his life! As if his whole career and
character were not being dyed one colour!

‘But I may ask you a question, Richard?’

T think so,’ said he, laughing. IT don't know who may not, if you may
not.’

‘You say, yourself, you are not leading a very settled life.’

‘How can I, my dear Esther, with nothing settled!’

‘Are you in debt again?’

‘Why, of course I am,’ said Richard, astonished at my simplicity.
‘Is it of course?’

‘My dear child, certainly. I can't throw myself into an object so
completely without expense. You forget, or perhaps you don't know,
that under either of the wills Ada and I take something. It's only a
question between the larger sum and the smaller. I shall be within the
mark any way. Bless your heart, my excellent girl,’ said Richard, quite
amused with me, ‘I shall be all right! I shall pull through, my dear!’

I felt so deeply sensible of the danger in which he stood that I tried, in
Ada's name, in my guardian's, in my own, by every fervent means that
I could think of, to warn him of it and to show him some of his
mistakes. He received everything I said with patience and gentleness,
but it all rebounded from him without taking the least effect. I could
not wonder at this after the reception his preoccupied mind had given
to my guardian's letter, but I determined to try Ada's influence yet.

So when our walk brought us round to the village again, and I went
home to breakfast, I prepared Ada for the account I was going to give
her and told her exactly what reason we had to dread that Richard
was losing himself and scattering his whole life to the winds. It made
her very unhappy, of course, though she had a far, far greater reliance
on his correcting his errors than I could have--which was so natural
and loving in my dear!--and she presently wrote him this little letter:

My dearest cousin,
Esther has told me all you said to her this morning. I write this to
repeat most earnestly for myself all that she said to you and to let you
know how sure I am that you will sooner or later find our cousin John
a pattern of truth, sincerity, and goodness, when you will deeply,
deeply grieve to have done him (without intending it) so much wrong.

I do not quite know how to write what I wish to say next, but I trust
you will understand it as I mean it. I have some fears, my dearest
cousin, that it may be partly for my sake you are now laying up so
much unhappiness for yourself--and if for yourself, for me. In case
this should be so, or in case you should entertain much thought of me
in what you are doing, I most earnestly entreat and beg you to desist.
You can do nothing for my sake that will make me half so happy as for
ever turning your back upon the shadow in which we both were born.
Do not be angry with me for saying this. Pray, pray, dear Richard, for
my sake, and for your own, and in a natural repugnance for that
source of trouble which had its share in making us both orphans
when we were very young, pray, pray, let it go for ever. We have
reason to know by this time that there is no good in it and no hope,
that there is nothing to be got from it but sorrow.

My dearest cousin, it is needless for me to say that you are quite free
and that it is very likely you may find some one whom you will love
much better than your first fancy. I am quite sure, if you will let me
say so, that the object of your choice would greatly prefer to follow
your fortunes far and wide, however moderate or poor, and see you
happy, doing your duty and pursuing your chosen way, than to have
the hope of being, or even to be, very rich with you (if such a thing
were possible) at the cost of dragging years of procrastination and
anxiety and of your indifference to other aims. You may wonder at my
saying this so confidently with so little knowledge or experience, but I
know it for a certainty from my own heart.

Ever, my dearest cousin, your most affectionate
Ada

This note brought Richard to us very soon, but it made little change in
him if any. We would fairly try, he said, who was right and who was
wrong--he would show us--we should see! He was animated and
glowing, as if Ada's tenderness had gratified him; but I could only
hope, with a sigh, that the letter might have some stronger effect upon
his mind on re-perusal than it assuredly had then.

As they were to remain with us that day and had taken their places to
return by the coach next morning, I sought an opportunity of
speaking to Mr Skimpole. Our out-of-door life easily threw one in my
way, and I delicately said that there was a responsibility in
encouraging Richard.

‘Responsibility, my dear Miss Summerson?’ he repeated, catching at
the word with the pleasantest smile. I am the last man in the world
for such a thing. I never was responsible in my life--I can't be.’

T am afraid everybody is obliged to be,’ said I timidly enough, he being
so much older and more clever than I.

‘No, really?’ said Mr Skimpole, receiving this new light with a most
agreeable jocularity of surprise. ‘But every man's not obliged to be
solvent? I am not. I never was. See, my dear Miss Summerson,’ he
took a handful of loose silver and halfpence from his pocket, ‘there's
so much money. I have not an idea how much. I have not the power of
counting. Call it four and ninepence--call it four pound nine. They tell
me I owe more than that. I dare say I do. I dare say I owe as much as
good-natured people will let me owe. If they don't stop, why should I?
There you have Harold Skimpole in little. If that's responsibility, I am
responsible.’

The perfect ease of manner with which he put the money up again and
looked at me with a smile on his refined face, as if he had been
mentioning a curious little fact about somebody else, almost made me
feel as if he really had nothing to do with it.

‘Now, when you mention responsibility,’ he resumed, I am disposed to
say that I never had the happiness of knowing any one whom I should
consider so refreshingly responsible as yourself. You appear to me to
be the very touchstone of responsibility. When I see you, my dear Miss
Summerson, intent upon the perfect working of the whole little orderly
system of which you are the centre, I feel inclined to say to myself--in
fact I do say to myself very often-- THAT'S responsibility!’

It was difficult, after this, to explain what I meant; but I persisted so
far as to say that we all hoped he would check and not confirm
Richard in the sanguine views he entertained just then.

‘Most willingly,’ he retorted, ‘if I could. But, my dear Miss Summerson,
I have no art, no disguise. If he takes me by the hand and leads me
through Westminster Hall in an airy procession after fortune, I must
go. If he says, 'Skimpole, join the dance!' I must join it. Common sense
wouldn't, I know, but I have NO common sense.’

It was very unfortunate for Richard, I said.

‘Do you think so!’ returned Mr Skimpole. ‘Don't say that, don't say
that. Let us suppose him keeping company with Common Sense--an
excellent man--a good deal wrinkled--dreadfully practical--change for
a ten-pound note in every pocket--ruled account-book in his hand--
say, upon the whole, resembling a tax-gatherer. Our dear Richard,
sanguine, ardent, overleaping obstacles, bursting with poetry like a
young bud, says to this highly respectable companion, 'I see a golden
prospect before me; it's very bright, it's very beautiful, it's very joyous;
here I go, bounding over the landscape to come at it!' The respectable
companion instantly knocks him down with the ruled account-book;
tells him in a literal, prosaic way that he sees no such thing; shows
him it's nothing but fees, fraud, horsehair wigs, and black gowns. Now
you know that's a painful change--sensible in the last degree, I have
no doubt, but disagreeable. I can't do it. I haven't got the ruled
account- book, I have none of the tax-gathering elements in my
composition, I am not at all respectable, and I don't want to be. Odd
perhaps, but so it is!’

It was idle to say more, so I proposed that we should join Ada and
Richard, who were a little in advance, and I gave up Mr Skimpole in
despair. He had been over the Hall in the course of the morning and
whimsically described the family pictures as we walked. There were
such portentous shepherdesses among the Ladies Dedlock dead and
gone, he told us, that peaceful crooks became weapons of assault in
their hands. They tended their flocks severely in buckram and powder
and put their sticking-plaster patches on to terrify commoners as the
chiefs of some other tribes put on their war-paint. There was a Sir
Somebody Dedlock, with a battle, a sprung-mine, volumes of smoke,
flashes of lightning, a town on fire, and a stormed fort, all in full
action between his horse's two hind legs, showing, he supposed, how
little a Dedlock made of such trifles. The whole race he represented as
having evidently been, in life, what he called ‘stuffed people’--a large
collection, glassy eyed, set up in the most approved manner on their
various twigs and perches, very correct, perfectly free from animation,
and always in glass cases.

I was not so easy now during any reference to the name but that I felt
it a relief when Richard, with an exclamation of surprise, hurried away
to meet a stranger whom he first descried coming slowly towards us.

‘Dear me!’ said Mr Skimpole. ‘Vholes!’

We asked if that were a friend of Richard's.

Friend and legal adviser,’ said Mr Skimpole. ‘Now, my dear Miss
Summerson, if you want common sense, responsibility, and

respectability, all united--if you want an exemplary man--Vholes is
THE man.’
We had not known, we said, that Richard was assisted by any
gentleman of that name.

‘When he emerged from legal infancy,’ returned Mr Skimpole, ‘he
parted from our conversational friend Kenge and took up, I believe,
with Vholes. Indeed, I know he did, because I introduced him to
Vholes.’

‘Had you known him long?’ asked Ada.

‘VVholes? My dear Miss Clare, I had had that kind of acquaintance with
him which I have had with several gentlemen of his profession. He had
done something or other in a very agreeable, civil manner-- taken
proceedings, I think, is the expression--which ended in the proceeding
of his taking ME. Somebody was so good as to step in and pay the
money--something and fourpence was the amount; I forget the pounds
and shillings, but I know it ended with fourpence, because it struck
me at the time as being so odd that I could owe anybody fourpence--
and after that I brought them together. Vholes asked me for the
introduction, and I gave it. Now I come to think of it,’ he looked
inquiringly at us with his frankest smile as he made the discovery,
Vholes bribed me, perhaps? He gave me something and called it
commission. Was it a five-pound note? Do you know, I think it MUST
have been a five-pound note!’

His further consideration of the point was prevented by Richard's
coming back to us in an excited state and hastily representing Mr
Vholes--a sallow man with pinched lips that looked as if they were
cold, a red eruption here and there upon his face, tall and thin, about
fifty years of age, high-shouldered, and stooping. Dressed in black,
black-gloved, and buttoned to the chin, there was nothing so
remarkable in him as a lifeless manner and a slow, fixed way he had
of looking at Richard.

T hope I don't disturb you, ladies,’ said Mr Vholes, and now I observed
that he was further remarkable for an inward manner of speaking. 1
arranged with Mr Carstone that he should always know when his
cause was in the Chancellor's paper, and being informed by one of my
clerks last night after post time that it stood, rather unexpectedly, in
the paper for to-morrow, I put myself into the coach early this
morning and came down to confer with him.’

‘Yes,’ said Richard, flushed, and looking triumphantly at Ada and me,
‘we don't do these things in the old slow way now. We spin along now!
Mr Vholes, we must hire something to get over to the post town in,
and catch the mail to-night, and go up by it!’
‘Anything you please, sir,’ returned Mr Vholes. T am quite at your
service.’

‘Let me see,’ said Richard, looking at his watch. Tf I run down to the
Dedlock, and get my portmanteau fastened up, and order a gig, or a
chaise, or whatever's to be got, we shall have an hour then before
starting. I'll come back to tea. Cousin Ada, will you and Esther take
care of Mr Vholes when I am gone?’

He was away directly, in his heat and hurry, and was soon lost in the
dusk of evening. We who were left walked on towards the house.

Is Mr Carstone's presence necessary to-morrow, Sir?’ said I. ‘Can it do
any good?’

‘No, miss,’ Mr Vholes replied. ‘I am not aware that it can.’

Both Ada and I expressed our regret that he should go, then, only to
be disappointed.

‘Mr Carstone has laid down the principle of watching his own
interests,’ said Mr Vholes, ‘and when a client lays down his own
principle, and it is not immoral, it devolves upon me to carry it out. I
wish in business to be exact and open. I am a widower with three
daughters--Emma, Jane, and Caroline--and my desire is so to
discharge the duties of life as to leave them a good name. This appears
to be a pleasant spot, miss.’

The remark being made to me in consequence of my being next him as
we walked, I assented and enumerated its chief attractions.

‘Indeed?’ said Mr Vholes. T have the privilege of supporting an aged
father in the Vale of Taunton--his native place--and I admire that
country very much. I had no idea there was anything so attractive
here.’

To keep up the conversation, I asked Mr Vholes if he would like to live
altogether in the country.

‘There, miss,’ said he, ‘you touch me on a tender string. My health is
not good (my digestion being much impaired), and if I had only myself
to consider, I should take refuge in rural habits, especially as the
cares of business have prevented me from ever coming much into
contact with general society, and particularly with ladies' society,
which I have most wished to mix in. But with my three daughters,
Emma, Jane, and Caroline--and my aged father--I cannot afford to be
selfish. It is true I have no longer to maintain a dear grandmother who
died in her hundred and second year, but enough remains to render it
indispensable that the mill should be always going.’

It required some attention to hear him on account of his inward
speaking and his lifeless manner.

‘You will excuse my having mentioned my daughters,’ he said. ‘They
are my weak point. I wish to leave the poor girls some little
independence, as well as a good name.’

We now arrived at Mr Boythorn's house, where the tea-table, all
prepared, was awaiting us. Richard came in restless and hurried
shortly afterwards, and leaning over Mr Vholes's chair, whispered
something in his ear. Mr Vholes replied aloud--or as nearly aloud I
suppose as he had ever replied to anything--’You will drive me, will
you, sir? It is all the same to me, sir. Anything you please. I am quite
at your service.’

We understood from what followed that Mr Skimpole was to be left
until the morning to occupy the two places which had been already
paid for. As Ada and I were both in low spirits concerning Richard and
very sorry so to part with him, we made it as plain as we politely could
that we should leave Mr Skimpole to the Dedlock Arms and retire
when the night-travellers were gone. Richard's high spirits carrying
everything before them, we all went out together to the top of the hill
above the village, where he had ordered a gig to wait and where we
found a man with a lantern standing at the head of the gaunt pale
horse that had been harnessed to it.

I never shall forget those two seated side by side in the lantern's light,
Richard all flush and fire and laughter, with the reins in his hand; Mr
Vholes quite still, black-gloved, and buttoned up, looking at him as if
he were looking at his prey and charming it. I have before me the
whole picture of the warm dark night, the summer lightning, the
dusty track of road closed in by hedgerows and high trees, the gaunt
pale horse with his ears pricked up, and the driving away at speed to
Jarndyce and Jarndyce.

My dear girl told me that night how Richard's being thereafter
prosperous or ruined, befriended or deserted, could only make this
difference to her, that the more he needed love from one unchanging
heart, the more love that unchanging heart would have to give him;
how he thought of her through his present errors, and she would
think of him at all times--never of herself if she could devote herself to
him, never of her own delights if she could minister to his.

And she kept her word?
I look along the road before me, where the distance already shortens
and the journey's end is growing visible; and true and good above the
dead sea of the Chancery suit and all the ashy fruit it cast ashore, I
think I see my darling.
Chapter XXXVIII - A Struggle

When our time came for returning to Bleak House again, we were
punctual to the day and were received with an overpowering welcome.
I was perfectly restored to health and strength, and finding my
housekeeping keys laid ready for me in my room, rang myself in as if I
had been a new year, with a merry little peal. ‘Once more, duty, duty,
Esther,’ said I; ‘and if you are not overjoyed to do it, more than
cheerfully and contentedly, through anything and everything, you
ought to be. That's all I have to say to you, my dear!’

The first few mornings were mornings of so much bustle and
business, devoted to such settlements of accounts, such repeated
journeys to and fro between the growlery and all other parts of the
house, so many rearrangements of drawers and presses, and such a
general new beginning altogether, that I had not a moment's leisure.
But when these arrangements were completed and everything was in
order, I paid a visit of a few hours to London, which something in the
letter I had destroyed at Chesney Wold had induced me to decide
upon in my own mind.

I made Caddy Jellyby--her maiden name was so natural to me that I
always called her by it--the pretext for this visit and wrote her a note
previously asking the favour of her company on a little business
expedition. Leaving home very early in the morning, I got to London by
stage-coach in such good time that I got to Newman Street with the
day before me.

Caddy, who had not seen me since her wedding-day, was so glad and
so affectionate that I was half inclined to fear I should make her
husband jealous. But he was, in his way, just as bad--I mean as good;
and in short it was the old story, and nobody would leave me any
possibility of doing anything meritorious.

The elder Mr Turveydrop was in bed, I found, and Caddy was milling
his chocolate, which a melancholy little boy who was an apprentice --
it seemed such a curious thing to be apprenticed to the trade of
dancing--was waiting to carry upstairs. Her father-in-law was
extremely kind and considerate, Caddy told me, and they lived most
happily together. (When she spoke of their living together, she meant
that the old gentleman had all the good things and all the good
lodging, while she and her husband had what they could get, and
were poked into two corner rooms over the Mews.)

‘And how is your mama, Caddy?’ said I.

‘Why, I hear of her, Esther,’ replied Caddy, ‘through Pa, but I see very
little of her. We are good friends, I am glad to say, but Ma thinks there
is something absurd in my having married a dancing- master, and she
is rather afraid of its extending to her.’

It struck me that if Mrs Jellyby had discharged her own natural duties
and obligations before she swept the horizon with a telescope in
search of others, she would have taken the best precautions against
becoming absurd, but I need scarcely observe that I kept this to
myself.

‘And your papa, Caddy?’

‘He comes here every evening,’ returned Caddy, ‘and is so fond of
sitting in the corner there that it's a treat to see him.’

Looking at the corner, I plainly perceived the mark of Mr Jellyby's
head against the wall. It was consolatory to know that he had found
such a resting-place for it.

‘And you, Caddy,’ said I, ‘you are always busy, I'll be bound?’

‘Well, my dear,’ returned Caddy, I am indeed, for to tell you a grand
secret, I am qualifying myself to give lessons. Prince's health is not
strong, and I want to be able to assist him. What with schools, and
classes here, and private pupils, AND the apprentices, he really has
too much to do, poor fellow!’

The notion of the apprentices was still so odd to me that I asked
Caddy if there were many of them.

‘Four,’ said Caddy. ‘One in-door, and three out. They are very good
children; only when they get together they WILL play-- children-like--
instead of attending to their work. So the little boy you saw just now
waltzes by himself in the empty kitchen, and we distribute the others
over the house as well as we can.’

‘That is only for their steps, of course?’ said I.

‘Only for their steps,’ said Caddy. ‘In that way they practise, so many
hours at a time, whatever steps they happen to be upon. They dance
in the academy, and at this time of year we do figures at five every
morning.’

‘Why, what a laborious life!’ I exclaimed.
T assure you, my dear,’ returned Caddy, smiling, ‘when the out- door

apprentices ring us up in the morning (the bell rings into our room,
not to disturb old Mr Turveydrop), and when I put up the window and
see them standing on the door-step with their little pumps under their
arms, I am actually reminded of the Sweeps.’

All this presented the art to me in a singular light, to be sure. Caddy
enjoyed the effect of her communication and cheerfully recounted the
particulars of her own studies.

‘You see, my dear, to save expense I ought to know something of the
piano, and I ought to know something of the kit too, and consequently
I have to practise those two instruments as well as the details of our
profession. If Ma had been like anybody else, I might have had some
little musical knowledge to begin upon. However, I hadn't any; and
that part of the work is, at first, a little discouraging, I must allow. But
I have a very good ear, and I am used to drudgery--I have to thank Ma
for that, at all events-- and where there's a will there's a way, you
know, Esther, the world over.’ Saying these words, Caddy laughingly
sat down at a little jingling square piano and really rattled off a
quadrille with great spirit. Then she good-humouredly and blushingly
got up again, and while she still laughed herself, said, ‘Don't laugh at
me, please; that's a dear girl!’

I would sooner have cried, but I did neither. I encouraged her and
praised her with all my heart. For I conscientiously believed, dancing-
master's wife though she was, and dancing-mistress though in her
limited ambition she aspired to be, she had struck out a natural,
wholesome, loving course of industry and perseverance that was quite
as good as a mission.

‘My dear,’ said Caddy, delighted, ‘you can't think how you cheer me. I
shall owe you, you don't know how much. What changes, Esther, even
in my small world! You recollect that first night, when I was so
unpolite and inky? Who would have thought, then, of my ever
teaching people to dance, of all other possibilities and impossibilities!’

Her husband, who had left us while we had this chat, now coming
back, preparatory to exercising the apprentices in the ball-room,
Caddy informed me she was quite at my disposal. But it was not my
time yet, I was glad to tell her, for I should have been vexed to take
her away then. Therefore we three adjourned to the apprentices
together, and I made one in the dance.

The apprentices were the queerest little people. Besides the
melancholy boy, who, I hoped, had not been made so by waltzing
alone in the empty kitchen, there were two other boys and one dirty
little limp girl in a gauzy dress. Such a precocious little girl, with such
a dowdy bonnet on (that, too, of a gauzy texture), who brought her
sandalled shoes in an old threadbare velvet reticule. Such mean little
boys, when they were not dancing, with string, and marbles, and
cramp-bones in their pockets, and the most untidy legs and feet--and
heels particularly.

I asked Caddy what had made their parents choose this profession for
them. Caddy said she didn't know; perhaps they were designed for
teachers, perhaps for the stage. They were all people in humble
circumstances, and the melancholy boy's mother kept a ginger-beer
shop.

We danced for an hour with great gravity, the melancholy child doing
wonders with his lower extremities, in which there appeared to be
some sense of enjoyment though it never rose above his waist. Caddy,
while she was observant of her husband and was evidently founded
upon him, had acquired a grace and self-possession of her own,
which, united to her pretty face and figure, was uncommonly
agreeable. She already relieved him of much of the instruction of these
young people, and he seldom interfered except to walk his part in the
figure if he had anything to do in it. He always played the tune. The
affectation of the gauzy child, and her condescension to the boys, was
a sight. And thus we danced an hour by the clock.

When the practice was concluded, Caddy's husband made himself
ready to go out of town to a school, and Caddy ran away to get ready
to go out with me. I sat in the ball-room in the interval, contemplating
the apprentices. The two out-door boys went upon the staircase to put
on their half-boots and pull the in-door boy's hair, as I judged from
the nature of his objections. Returning with their jackets buttoned
and their pumps stuck in them, they then produced packets of cold
bread and meat and bivouacked under a painted lyre on the wall. The
little gauzy child, having whisked her sandals into the reticule and put
on a trodden-down pair of shoes, shook her head into the dowdy
bonnet at one shake, and answering my inquiry whether she liked
dancing by replying, ‘Not with boys,’ tied it across her chin, and went
home contemptuous.

‘Old Mr Turveydrop is so sorry,’ said Caddy, ‘that he has not finished
dressing yet and cannot have the pleasure of seeing you before you go.
You are such a favourite of his, Esther.’

I expressed myself much obliged to him, but did not think it necessary
to add that I readily dispensed with this attention.

It takes him a long time to dress,’ said Caddy, ‘because he is very
much looked up to in such things, you know, and has a reputation to
support. You can't think how kind he is to Pa. He talks to Pa of an
evening about the Prince Regent, and I never saw Pa so interested.’
There was something in the picture of Mr Turveydrop bestowing his
deportment on Mr Jellyby that quite took my fancy. I asked Caddy if
he brought her papa out much.

‘No,’ said Caddy, I don't know that he does that, but he talks to Pa,
and Pa greatly admires him, and listens, and likes it. Of course I am
aware that Pa has hardly any claims to deportment, but they get on
together delightfully. You can't think what good companions they
make. I never saw Pa take snuff before in my life, but he takes one
pinch out of Mr Turveydrop's box regularly and keeps putting it to his
nose and taking it away again all the evening.’

That old Mr Turveydrop should ever, in the chances and changes of
life, have come to the rescue of Mr Jellyby from Borrioboola-Gha
appeared to me to be one of the pleasantest of oddities.

‘As to Peepy,’ said Caddy with a little hesitation, ‘whom I was most
afraid of--next to having any family of my own, Esther--as an
inconvenience to Mr Turveydrop, the kindness of the old gentleman to
that child is beyond everything. He asks to see him, my dear! He lets
him take the newspaper up to him in bed; he gives him the crusts of
his toast to eat; he sends him on little errands about the house; he
tells him to come to me for sixpences. In short,’ said Caddy cheerily,
‘and not to prose, I am a very fortunate girl and ought to be very
grateful. Where are we going, Esther?’

‘To the Old Street Road,’ said I, ‘where I have a few words to say to the
solicitor's clerk who was sent to meet me at the coach- office on the
very day when I came to London and first saw you, my dear. Now I
think of it, the gentleman who brought us to your house.’

Then, indeed, I seem to be naturally the person to go with you,’
returned Caddy.

To the Old Street Road we went and there inquired at Mrs Guppy's
residence for Mrs Guppy. Mrs Guppy, occupying the parlours and
having indeed been visibly in danger of cracking herself like a nut in
the front-parlour door by peeping out before she was asked for,
immediately presented herself and requested us to walk in. She was
an old lady in a large cap, with rather a red nose and rather an
unsteady eye, but smiling all over. Her close little sitting-room was
prepared for a visit, and there was a portrait of her son in it which, I
had almost written here, was more like than life: it insisted upon him
with such obstinacy, and was so determined not to let him off.

Not only was the portrait there, but we found the original there too. He
was dressed in a great many colours and was discovered at a table
reading law-papers with his forefinger to his forehead.
‘Miss Summerson,’ said Mr Guppy, rising, ‘this is indeed an oasis.
Mother, will you be so good as to put a chair for the other lady and get
out of the gangway.’

Mrs Guppy, whose incessant smiling gave her quite a waggish
appearance, did as her son requested and then sat down in a corner,
holding her pocket handkerchief to her chest, like a fomentation, with
both hands.

I presented Caddy, and Mr Guppy said that any friend of mine was
more than welcome. I then proceeded to the object of my visit.

T took the liberty of sending you a note, sir,’ said I.

Mr Guppy acknowledged the receipt by taking it out of his breast-
pocket, putting it to his lips, and returning it to his pocket with a bow.
Mr Guppy's mother was so diverted that she rolled her head as she
smiled and made a silent appeal to Caddy with her elbow.

‘Could I speak to you alone for a moment?’ said I.

Anything like the jocoseness of Mr Guppy's mother just now, I think I
never saw. She made no sound of laughter, but she rolled her head,
and shook it, and put her handkerchief to her mouth, and appealed to
Caddy with her elbow, and her hand, and her shoulder, and was so
unspeakably entertained altogether that it was with some difficulty
she could marshal Caddy through the little folding-door into her
bedroom adjoining.

‘Miss Summerson,’ said Mr Guppy, ‘you will excuse the waywardness
of a parent ever mindful of a son's appiness. My mother, though
highly exasperating to the feelings, is actuated by maternal dictates.’

I could hardly have believed that anybody could in a moment have
turned so red or changed so much as Mr Guppy did when I now put
up my veil.

T asked the favour of seeing you for a few moments here,’ said I, ‘in
preference to calling at Mr Kenge's because, remembering what you
said on an occasion when you spoke to me in confidence, I feared I
might otherwise cause you some embarrassment, Mr Guppy.’

I caused him embarrassment enough as it was, I am sure. I never saw
such faltering, such confusion, such amazement and apprehension.

‘Miss Summerson,’ stammered Mr Guppy, ‘1--I--beg your pardon, but
in our profession--we--we--find it necessary to be explicit. You have
referred to an occasion, miss, when I--when I did myself the honour of
making a declaration which--’

Something seemed to rise in his throat that he could not possibly
swallow. He put his hand there, coughed, made faces, tried again to
swallow it, coughed again, made faces again, looked all round the
room, and fluttered his papers.

‘A kind of giddy sensation has come upon me, miss,’ he explained,
‘which rather knocks me over. I--er--a little subject to this sort of
thing--er--by George!’

I gave him a little time to recover. He consumed it in putting his hand
to his forehead and taking it away again, and in backing his chair into
the corner behind him.

‘My intention was to remark, miss,’ said Mr Guppy, ‘dear me--
something bronchial, I think--hem!--to remark that you was so good
on that occasion as to repel and repudiate that declaration. You-- you
wouldn't perhaps object to admit that? Though no witnesses are
present, it might be a satisfaction to--to your mind--if you was to put
in that admission.’

‘There can be no doubt,’ said I, ‘that I declined your proposal without
any reservation or qualification whatever, Mr Guppy.’

‘Thank you, miss,’ he returned, measuring the table with his troubled
hands. ‘So far that's satisfactory, and it does you credit. Er--this is
certainly bronchial!--must be in the tubes-- er--you wouldn't perhaps
be offended if I was to mention--not that it's necessary, for your own
good sense or any person's sense must show 'em that--if I was to
mention that such declaration on my part was final, and there
terminated?’

T quite understand that,’ said I.

‘Perhaps--er--it may not be worth the form, but it might be a
satisfaction to your mind--perhaps you wouldn't object to admit that,
miss?’ said Mr Guppy.

T admit it most fully and freely,’ said I.

‘Thank you,’ returned Mr Guppy. ‘Very honourable, I am sure. I regret
that my arrangements in life, combined with circumstances over
which I have no control, will put it out of my power ever to fall back
upon that offer or to renew it in any shape or form whatever, but it
will ever be a retrospect entwined--er--with friendship's bowers.’ Mr
Guppy's bronchitis came to his relief and stopped his measurement of
the table.

‘may now perhaps mention what I wished to say to you?’ I began.

T shall be honoured, I am sure,’ said Mr Guppy. I am so persuaded
that your own good sense and right feeling, miss, will-- will keep you
as square as possible--that I can have nothing but pleasure, I am
sure, in hearing any observations you may wish to offer.’

‘You were so good as to imply, on that occasion--’

‘Excuse me, miss,’ said Mr Guppy, ‘but we had better not travel out of
the record into implication. I cannot admit that I implied anything.’

‘You said on that occasion,’ I recommenced, ‘that you might possibly
have the means of advancing my interests and promoting my fortunes
by making discoveries of which I should be the subject. I presume that
you founded that belief upon your general knowledge of my being an
orphan girl, indebted for everything to the benevolence of Mr
Jarndyce. Now, the beginning and the end of what I have come to beg
of you is, Mr Guppy, that you will have the kindness to relinquish all
idea of so serving me. I have thought of this sometimes, and I have
thought of it most lately--since I have been ill. At length I have
decided, in case you should at any time recall that purpose and act
upon it in any way, to come to you and assure you that you are
altogether mistaken. You could make no discovery in reference to me
that would do me the least service or give me the least pleasure. I am
acquainted with my personal history, and I have it in my power to
assure you that you never can advance my welfare by such means.
You may, perhaps, have abandoned this project a long time. If so,
excuse my giving you unnecessary trouble. If not, I entreat you, on the
assurance I have given you, henceforth to lay it aside. I beg you to do
this, for my peace.’

T am bound to confess,’ said Mr Guppy, ‘that you express yourself,
miss, with that good sense and right feeling for which I gave you
credit. Nothing can be more satisfactory than such right feeling, and if
I mistook any intentions on your part just now, I am prepared to
tender a full apology. I should wish to be understood, miss, as hereby
offering that apology--limiting it, as your own good sense and right
feeling will point out the necessity of, to the present proceedings.’

I must say for Mr Guppy that the snuffling manner he had had upon
him improved very much. He seemed truly glad to be able to do
something I asked, and he looked ashamed.
‘Tf you will allow me to finish what I have to say at once so that I may
have no occasion to resume,’ I went on, seeing him about to speak,
‘you will do me a kindness, sir. I come to you as privately as possible
because you announced this impression of yours to me in a
confidence which I have really wished to respect--and which I always
have respected, as you remember. I have mentioned my illness. There
really is no reason why I should hesitate to say that I know very well
that any little delicacy I might have had in making a request to you is
quite removed. Therefore I make the entreaty I have now preferred,
and I hope you will have sufficient consideration for me to accede to
it.’

I must do Mr Guppy the further justice of saying that he had looked
more and more ashamed and that he looked most ashamed and very
earnest when he now replied with a burning face, ‘Upon my word and
honour, upon my life, upon my soul, Miss Summerson, as I am a
living man, I'll act according to your wish! I'll never go another step in
opposition to it. I'll take my oath to it if it will be any satisfaction to
you. In what I promise at this present time touching the matters now
in question,’ continued Mr Guppy rapidly, as if he were repeating a
familiar form of words, I speak the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth, so--’

Tam quite satisfied,’ said I, rising at this point, ‘and I thank you very
much. Caddy, my dear, I am ready!’

Mr Guppy's mother returned with Caddy (now making me the
recipient of her silent laughter and her nudges), and we took our
leave. Mr Guppy saw us to the door with the air of one who was either
imperfectly awake or walking in his sleep; and we left him there,
staring.

But in a minute he came after us down the street without any hat,
and with his long hair all blown about, and stopped us, saying
fervently, ‘Miss Summerson, upon my honour and soul, you may
depend upon me!’

T do,’ said I, ‘quite confidently.’

T beg your pardon, miss,’ said Mr Guppy, going with one leg and
staying with the other, ‘but this lady being present--your own witness-
-it might be a satisfaction to your mind (which I should wish to set at

rest) if you was to repeat those admissions.’

‘Well, Caddy,’ said I, turning to her, ‘perhaps you will not be surprised
when I tell you, my dear, that there never has been any engagement--’

‘No proposal or promise of marriage whatsoever,’ suggested Mr Guppy.
‘No proposal or promise of marriage whatsoever,’ said I, ‘between this
gentleman--’

‘William Guppy, of Penton Place, Pentonville, in the county of
Middlesex,’ he murmured.

‘Between this gentleman, Mr William Guppy, of Penton Place,
Pentonville, in the county of Middlesex, and myself.’

Thank you, miss,’ said Mr Guppy. ‘Very full--er--excuse me-- lady's
name, Christian and surname both?’

I gave them.

‘Married woman, I believe?’ said Mr Guppy. ‘Married woman. Thank
you. Formerly Caroline Jellyby, spinster, then of Thavies Inn, within
the city of London, but extra-parochial; now of Newman Street, Oxford
Street. Much obliged.’

He ran home and came running back again.

‘Touching that matter, you know, I really and truly am very sorry that
my arrangements in life, combined with circumstances over which I
have no control, should prevent a renewal of what was wholly
terminated some time back,’ said Mr Guppy to me forlornly and
despondently, ‘but it couldn't be. Now COULD it, you know! I only put
it to you.’

I replied it certainly could not. The subject did not admit of a doubt.
He thanked me and ran to his mother's again--and back again.

It's very honourable of you, miss, I am sure,’ said Mr Guppy. ‘Tf an
altar could be erected in the bowers of friendship--but, upon my soul,
you may rely upon me in every respect save and except the tender
passion only!’

The struggle in Mr Guppy's breast and the numerous oscillations it
occasioned him between his mother's door and us were sufficiently
conspicuous in the windy street (particularly as his hair wanted
cutting) to make us hurry away. I did so with a lightened heart; but
when we last looked back, Mr Guppy was still oscillating in the same
troubled state of mind.
Chapter XXXIX - Attorney and Client

The name of Mr Vholes, preceded by the legend Ground-Floor, is
inscribed upon a door-post in Symond's Inn, Chancery Lane--a little,
pale, wall-eyed, woebegone inn like a large dust-binn of two
compartments and a sifter. It looks as if Symond were a sparing man
in his way and constructed his inn of old building materials which
took kindly to the dry rot and to dirt and all things decaying and
dismal, and perpetuated Symond's memory with congenial
shabbiness. Quartered in this dingy hatchment commemorative of
Symond are the legal bearings of Mr Vholes.

Mr Vholes's office, in disposition retiring and in situation retired, is
squeezed up in a corner and blinks at a dead wall. Three feet of
knotty-floored dark passage bring the client to Mr Vholes's jet-black
door, in an angle profoundly dark on the brightest midsummer
morning and encumbered by a black bulk-head of cellarage staircase
against which belated civilians generally strike their brows. Mr
Vholes's chambers are on so small a scale that one clerk can open the
door without getting off his stool, while the other who elbows him at
the same desk has equal facilities for poking the fire. A smell as of
unwholesome sheep blending with the smell of must and dust is
referable to the nightly (and often daily) consumption of mutton fat in
candles and to the fretting of parchment forms and skins in greasy
drawers. The atmosphere is otherwise stale and close. The place was
last painted or whitewashed beyond the memory of man, and the two
chimneys smoke, and there is a loose outer surface of soot
everywhere, and the dull cracked windows in their heavy frames have
but one piece of character in them, which is a determination to be
always dirty and always shut unless coerced. This accounts for the
phenomenon of the weaker of the two usually having a bundle of
firewood thrust between its jaws in hot weather.

Mr Vholes is a very respectable man. He has not a large business, but
he is a very respectable man. He is allowed by the greater attorneys
who have made good fortunes or are making them to be a most
respectable man. He never misses a chance in his practice, which is a
mark of respectability. He never takes any pleasure, which is another
mark of respectability. He is reserved and serious, which is another
mark of respectability. His digestion is impaired, which is highly
respectable. And he is making hay of the grass which is flesh, for his
three daughters. And his father is dependent on him in the Vale of
Taunton.

The one great principle of the English law is to make business for
itself. There is no other principle distinctly, certainly, and consistently
maintained through all its narrow turnings. Viewed by this light it
becomes a coherent scheme and not the monstrous maze the laity are
apt to think it. Let them but once clearly perceive that its grand
principle is to make business for itself at their expense, and surely
they will cease to grumble.

But not perceiving this quite plainly--only seeing it by halves in a
confused way--the laity sometimes suffer in peace and pocket, with a
bad grace, and DO grumble very much. Then this respectability of Mr
Vholes is brought into powerful play against them. ‘Repeal this
statute, my good sir?’ says Mr Kenge to a smarting client. ‘Repeal it,
my dear sir? Never, with my consent. Alter this law, sir, and what will
be the effect of your rash proceeding on a class of practitioners very
worthily represented, allow me to say to you, by the opposite attorney
in the case, Mr Vholes? Sir, that class of practitioners would be swept
from the face of the earth. Now you cannot afford--I will say, the social
system cannot afford--to lose an order of men like Mr Vholes. Diligent,
persevering, steady, acute in business. My dear sir, I understand your
present feelings against the existing state of things, which I grant to
be a little hard in your case; but I can never raise my voice for the
demolition of a class of men like Mr Vholes.’ The respectability of Mr
Vholes has even been cited with crushing effect before Parliamentary
committees, as in the following blue minutes of a distinguished
attorney's evidence. ‘Question (number five hundred and seventeen
thousand eight hundred and sixty-nine): If I understand you, these
forms of practice indisputably occasion delay? Answer: Yes, some
delay. Question: And great expense? Answer: Most assuredly they
cannot be gone through for nothing. Question: And unspeakable
vexation? Answer: I am not prepared to say that. They have never
given ME any vexation; quite the contrary. Question: But you think
that their abolition would damage a class of practitioners? Answer: I
have no doubt of it. Question: Can you instance any type of that
class? Answer: Yes. I would unhesitatingly mention Mr Vholes. He
would be ruined. Question: Mr Vholes is considered, in the profession,
a respectable man? Answer:’--which proved fatal to the inquiry for ten
years--’Mr Vholes is considered, in the profession, a MOST respectable
man.’

So in familiar conversation, private authorities no less disinterested
will remark that they don't know what this age is coming to, that we
are plunging down precipices, that now here is something else gone,
that these changes are death to people like Vholes--a man of
undoubted respectability, with a father in the Vale of Taunton, and
three daughters at home. Take a few steps more in this direction, say
they, and what is to become of Vholes's father? Is he to perish? And of
Vholes's daughters? Are they to be shirt-makers, or governesses? As
though, Mr Vholes and his relations being minor cannibal chiefs and
it being proposed to abolish cannibalism, indignant champions were
to put the case thus: Make man-eating unlawful, and you starve the
Vholeses!
In a word, Mr Vholes, with his three daughters and his father in the
Vale of Taunton, is continually doing duty, like a piece of timber, to
shore up some decayed foundation that has become a pitfall and a
nuisance. And with a great many people in a great many instances,
the question is never one of a change from wrong to right (which is
quite an extraneous consideration), but is always one of injury or
advantage to that eminently respectable legion, Vholes.

The Chancellor is, within these ten minutes, ‘up’ for the long vacation.
Mr Vholes, and his young client, and several blue bags hastily stuffed
out of all regularity of form, as the larger sort of serpents are in their
first gorged state, have returned to the official den. Mr Vholes, quiet
and unmoved, as a man of so much respectability ought to be, takes
off his close black gloves as if he were skinning his hands, lifts off his
tight hat as if he were scalping himself, and sits down at his desk. The
client throws his hat and gloves upon the ground--tosses them
anywhere, without looking after them or caring where they go; flings
himself into a chair, half sighing and half groaning; rests his aching
head upon his hand and looks the portrait of young despair.

‘Again nothing done!’ says Richard. ‘Nothing, nothing done!’

‘Don't say nothing done, sir,’ returns the placid Vholes. ‘That is
scarcely fair, sir, scarcely fair!’

‘Why, what IS done?’ says Richard, turning gloomily upon him.

‘That may not be the whole question,’ returns Vholes, ‘The question
may branch off into what is doing, what is doing?’

‘And what is doing?’ asks the moody client.

Vholes, sitting with his arms on the desk, quietly bringing the tips of
his five right fingers to meet the tips of his five left fingers, and quietly
separating them again, and fixedly and slowly looking at his client,
replies, ‘A good deal is doing, sir. We have put our shoulders to the
wheel, Mr Carstone, and the wheel is going round.’

‘Yes, with Ixion on it. How am I to get through the next four or five
accursed months?’ exclaims the young man, rising from his chair and
walking about the room.

Mr C.,’ returns Vholes, following him close with his eyes wherever he
goes, ‘your spirits are hasty, and I am sorry for it on your account.
Excuse me if I recommend you not to chafe so much, not to be so
impetuous, not to wear yourself out so. You should have more
patience. You should sustain yourself better.’
T ought to imitate you, in fact, Mr Vholes?’ says Richard, sitting down
again with an impatient laugh and beating the devil's tattoo with his
boot on the patternless carpet.

‘Sir,’ returns Vholes, always looking at the client as if he were making
a lingering meal of him with his eyes as well as with his professional
appetite. ‘Sir,’ returns Vholes with his inward manner of speech and
his bloodless quietude, I should not have had the presumption to
propose myself as a model for your imitation or any man's. Let me but
leave the good name to my three daughters, and that is enough for
me; I am not a self-seeker. But since you mention me so pointedly, I
will acknowledge that I should like to impart to you a little of my--
come, sir, you are disposed to call it insensibility, and I am sure I have
no objection--say insensibility--a little of my insensibility.’

‘Mr Vholes,’ explains the client, somewhat abashed, I had no
intention to accuse you of insensibility.’

T think you had, sir, without knowing it,’ returns the equable Vholes.
Very naturally. It is my duty to attend to your interests with a cool
head, and I can quite understand that to your excited feelings I may
appear, at such times as the present, insensible. My daughters may
know me better; my aged father may know me better. But they have
known me much longer than you have, and the confiding eye of
affection is not the distrustful eye of business. Not that I complain,
sir, of the eye of business being distrustful; quite the contrary. In
attending to your interests, I wish to have all possible checks upon
me; it is right that I should have them; I court inquiry. But your
interests demand that I should be cool and methodical, Mr Carstone;
and I cannot be otherwise--no, sir, not even to please you.’

Mr Vholes, after glancing at the official cat who is patiently watching a
mouse's hole, fixes his charmed gaze again on his young client and
proceeds in his buttoned-up, half-audible voice as if there were an
unclean spirit in him that will neither come out nor speak out, ‘What
are you to do, sir, you inquire, during the vacation. I should hope you
gentlemen of the army may find many means of amusing yourselves if
you give your minds to it. If you had asked me what I was to do during
the vacation, I could have answered you more readily. I am to attend
to your interests. I am to be found here, day by day, attending to your
interests. That is my duty, Mr C., and term-time or vacation makes no
difference to me. If you wish to consult me as to your interests, you
will find me here at all times alike. Other professional men go out of
town. I don't. Not that I blame them for going; I merely say I don't go.
This desk is your rock, sir!’
Mr Vholes gives it a rap, and it sounds as hollow as a coffin. Not to
Richard, though. There is encouragement in the sound to him.
Perhaps Mr Vholes knows there is.

T am perfectly aware, Mr Vholes,’ says Richard, more familiarly and
good-humouredly, ‘that you are the most reliable fellow in the world
and that to have to do with you is to have to do with a man of
business who is not to be hoodwinked. But put yourself in my case,
dragging on this dislocated life, sinking deeper and deeper into
difficulty every day, continually hoping and continually disappointed,
conscious of change upon change for the worse in myself, and of no
change for the better in anything else, and you will find it a dark-
looking case sometimes, as I do.’

‘YYou know,’ says Mr Vholes, ‘that I never give hopes, sir. I told you
from the first, Mr C., that I never give hopes. Particularly in a case like
this, where the greater part of the costs comes out of the estate, I
should not be considerate of my good name if I gave hopes. It might
seem as if costs were my object. Still, when you say there is no change
for the better, I must, as a bare matter of fact, deny that.’

‘Aye?’ returns Richard, brightening. ‘But how do you make it out?’
‘Mr Carstone, you are represented by--’
‘You said just now--a rock.’

Yes, sir,’ says Mr Vholes, gently shaking his head and rapping the
hollow desk, with a sound as if ashes were falling on ashes, and dust
on dust, ‘a rock. That's something. You are separately represented,
and no longer hidden and lost in the interests of others. THAT'S
something. The suit does not sleep; we wake it up, we air it, we walk it
about. THAT'S something. It's not all Jarndyce, in fact as well as in
name. THAT'S something. Nobody has it all his own way now, sir. And
THAT'S something, surely.’

Richard, his face flushing suddenly, strikes the desk with his clenched
hand.

‘Mr Vholes! If any man had told me when I first went to John
Jarndyce's house that he was anything but the disinterested friend he
seemed--that he was what he has gradually turned out to be--I could
have found no words strong enough to repel the slander; I could not
have defended him too ardently. So little did I know of the world!
Whereas now I do declare to you that he becomes to me the
embodiment of the suit; that in place of its being an abstraction, it is
John Jarndyce; that the more I suffer, the more indignant I am with
him; that every new delay and every new disappointment is only a new
injury from John Jarndyce's hand.’

‘No, no,’ says Vholes. ‘Don't say so. We ought to have patience, all of
us. Besides, I never disparage, sir. I never disparage.’

‘Mr Vholes,’ returns the angry client. ‘You know as well as I that he
would have strangled the suit if he could.’

‘He was not active in it,’ Mr Vholes admits with an appearance of
reluctance. ‘He certainly was not active in it. But however, but
however, he might have had amiable intentions. Who can read the
heart, Mr C.!’

‘You can,’ returns Richard.
1, Mr C.?’

‘Well enough to know what his intentions were. Are or are not our
interests conflicting? Tell--me--that!’ says Richard, accompanying his
last three words with three raps on his rock of trust.

Mr C.,’ returns Vholes, immovable in attitude and never winking his
hungry eyes, I should be wanting in my duty as your professional
adviser, I should be departing from my fidelity to your interests, if I
represented those interests as identical with the interests of Mr
Jarndyce. They are no such thing, sir. I never impute motives; I both
have and am a father, and I never impute motives. But I must not
shrink from a professional duty, even if it sows dissensions in
families. I understand you to be now consulting me professionally as
to your interests? You are so? I reply, then, they are not identical with
those of Mr Jarndyce.’

‘Of course they are not!’ cries Richard. ‘You found that out long ago.’

Mr C.,’ returns Vholes, I wish to say no more of any third party than
is necessary. I wish to leave my good name unsullied, together with
any little property of which I may become possessed through industry
and perseverance, to my daughters Emma, Jane, and Caroline. I also
desire to live in amity with my professional brethren. When Mr
Skimpole did me the honour, sir--I will not say the very high honour,
for I never stoop to flattery--of bringing us together in this room, I
mentioned to you that I could offer no opinion or advice as to your
interests while those interests were entrusted to another member of
the profession. And I spoke in such terms as I was bound to speak of
Kenge and Carboy's office, which stands high. You, sir, thought fit to
withdraw your interests from that keeping nevertheless and to offer
them to me. You brought them with clean hands, sir, and I accepted
them with clean hands. Those interests are now paramount in this
office. My digestive functions, as you may have heard me mention, are
not in a good state, and rest might improve them; but I shall not rest,
sir, while I am your representative. Whenever you want me, you will
find me here. Summon me anywhere, and I will come. During the long
vacation, sir, I shall devote my leisure to studying your interests more
and more closely and to making arrangements for moving heaven and
earth (including, of course, the Chancellor) after Michaelmas term;
and when I ultimately congratulate you, sir,’ says Mr Vholes with the
severity of a determined man, ‘when I ultimately congratulate you, sir,
with all my heart, on your accession to fortune--which, but that I
never give hopes, I might say something further about--you will owe
me nothing beyond whatever little balance may be then outstanding of
the costs as between solicitor and client not included in the taxed
costs allowed out of the estate. I pretend to no claim upon you, Mr C.,
but for the zealous and active discharge--not the languid and routine
discharge, sir: that much credit I stipulate for--of my professional
duty. My duty prosperously ended, all between us is ended.’

Vholes finally adds, by way of rider to this declaration of his
principles, that as Mr Carstone is about to rejoin his regiment,
perhaps Mr C. will favour him with an order on his agent for twenty
pounds on account.

‘For there have been many little consultations and attendances of late,
sir,’ observes Vholes, turning over the leaves of his diary, ‘and these
things mount up, and I don't profess to be a man of capital. When we
first entered on our present relations I stated to you openly--it is a
principle of mine that there never can be too much openness between
solicitor and client--that I was not a man of capital and that if capital
was your object you had better leave your papers in Kenge's office. No,
Mr C., you will find none of the advantages or disadvantages of capital
here, sir. This,’ Vholes gives the desk one hollow blow again, ‘is your
rock; it pretends to be nothing more.’

The client, with his dejection insensibly relieved and his vague hopes
rekindled, takes pen and ink and writes the draft, not without
perplexed consideration and calculation of the date it may bear,
implying scant effects in the agent's hands. All the while, Vholes,
buttoned up in body and mind, looks at him attentively. All the while,
Vholes's official cat watches the mouse's hole.

Lastly, the client, shaking hands, beseeches Mr Vholes, for heaven's
sake and earth's sake, to do his utmost to ‘pull him through’ the
Court of Chancery. Mr Vholes, who never gives hopes, lays his palm
upon the client's shoulder and answers with a smile, ‘Always here, sir.
Personally, or by letter, you will always find me here, sir, with my
shoulder to the wheel.’ Thus they part, and Vholes, left alone, employs
himself in carrying sundry little matters out of his diary into his draft
bill book for the ultimate behoof of his three daughters. So might an
industrious fox or bear make up his account of chickens or stray
travellers with an eye to his cubs, not to disparage by that word the
three raw-visaged, lank, and buttoned-up maidens who dwell with the
parent Vholes in an earthy cottage situated in a damp garden at
Kennington.

Richard, emerging from the heavy shade of Symond's Inn into the
sunshine of Chancery Lane--for there happens to be sunshine there
to-day--walks thoughtfully on, and turns into Lincoln's Inn, and
passes under the shadow of the Lincoln's Inn trees. On many such
loungers have the speckled shadows of those trees often fallen; on the
like bent head, the bitten nail, the lowering eye, the lingering step, the
purposeless and dreamy air, the good consuming and consumed, the
life turned sour. This lounger is not shabby yet, but that may come.
Chancery, which knows no wisdom but in precedent, is very rich in
such precedents; and why should one be different from ten thousand?

Yet the time is so short since his depreciation began that as he
saunters away, reluctant to leave the spot for some long months
together, though he hates it, Richard himself may feel his own case as
if it were a startling one. While his heart is heavy with corroding care,
suspense, distrust, and doubt, it may have room for some sorrowful
wonder when he recalls how different his first visit there, how different
he, how different all the colours of his mind. But injustice breeds
injustice; the fighting with shadows and being defeated by them
necessitates the setting up of substances to combat; from the
impalpable suit which no man alive can understand, the time for that
being long gone by, it has become a gloomy relief to turn to the
palpable figure of the friend who would have saved him from this ruin
and make HIM his enemy. Richard has told Vholes the truth. Is he in
a hardened or a softened mood, he still lays his injuries equally at
that door; he was thwarted, in that quarter, of a set purpose, and that
purpose could only originate in the one subject that is resolving his
existence into itself; besides, it is a justification to him in his own eyes
to have an embodied antagonist and oppressor.

Is Richard a monster in all this, or would Chancery be found rich in
such precedents too if they could be got for citation from the
Recording Angel?

Two pairs of eyes not unused to such people look after him, as, biting
his nails and brooding, he crosses the square and is swallowed up by
the shadow of the southern gateway. Mr Guppy and Mr Weevle are the
possessors of those eyes, and they have been leaning in conversation
against the low stone parapet under the trees. He passes close by
them, seeing nothing but the ground.
William,’ says Mr Weevle, adjusting his whiskers, ‘there's combustion
going on there! It's not a case of spontaneous, but it's smouldering
combustion it is.’

‘Ah!’ says Mr Guppy. ‘He wouldn't keep out of Jarndyce, and I suppose
he's over head and ears in debt. I never knew much of him. He was as
high as the monument when he was on trial at our place. A good
riddance to me, whether as clerk or client! Well, Tony, that as I was
mentioning is what they're up to.’

Mr Guppy, refolding his arms, resettles himself against the parapet,
as resuming a conversation of interest.

‘They are still up to it, sir,’ says Mr Guppy, ‘still taking stock, still
examining papers, still going over the heaps and heaps of rubbish. At
this rate they'll be at it these seven years.’

‘And Small is helping?’

‘Small left us at a week's notice. Told Kenge his grandfather's business
was too much for the old gentleman and he could better himself by
undertaking it. There had been a coolness between myself and Small
on account of his being so close. But he said you and I began it, and
as he had me there--for we did--I put our acquaintance on the old
footing. That's how I come to know what they're up to.’

‘You haven't looked in at all?’

Tony,’ says Mr Guppy, a little disconcerted, ‘to be unreserved with
you, I don't greatly relish the house, except in your company, and
therefore I have not; and therefore I proposed this little appointment
for our fetching away your things. There goes the hour by the clock!
Tony’--Mr Guppy becomes mysteriously and tenderly eloquent--’it is
necessary that I should impress upon your mind once more that
circumstances over which I have no control have made a melancholy
alteration in my most cherished plans and in that unrequited image
which I formerly mentioned to you as a friend. That image is
shattered, and that idol is laid low. My only wish now in connexion
with the objects which I had an idea of carrying out in the court with
your aid as a friend is to let 'em alone and bury ‘em in oblivion. Do
you think it possible, do you think it at all likely (I put it to you, Tony,
as a friend), from your knowledge of that capricious and deep old
character who fell a prey to the--spontaneous element, do you, Tony,
think it at all likely that on second thoughts he put those letters away
anywhere, after you saw him alive, and that they were not destroyed
that night?’
Mr Weevle reflects for some time. Shakes his head. Decidedly thinks
not.

Tony,’ says Mr Guppy as they walk towards the court, ‘once again
understand me, as a friend. Without entering into further
explanations, I may repeat that the idol is down. I have no purpose to
serve now but burial in oblivion. To that I have pledged myself. I owe it
to myself, and I owe it to the shattered image, as also to the
circumstances over which I have no control. If you was to express to
me by a gesture, by a wink, that you saw lying anywhere in your late
lodgings any papers that so much as looked like the papers in
question, I would pitch them into the fire, sir, on my own
responsibility.’

Mr Weevle nods. Mr Guppy, much elevated in his own opinion by
having delivered these observations, with an air in part forensic and in
part romantic--this gentleman having a passion for conducting
anything in the form of an examination, or delivering anything in the
form of a summing up or a speech--accompanies his friend with
dignity to the court.

Never since it has been a court has it had such a Fortunatus' purse of
gossip as in the proceedings at the rag and bottle shop. Regularly,
every morning at eight, is the elder Mr Smallweed brought down to the
corner and carried in, accompanied by Mrs Smallweed, Judy, and
Bart; and regularly, all day, do they all remain there until nine at
night, solaced by gipsy dinners, not abundant in quantity, from the
cook's shop, rummaging and searching, digging, delving, and diving
among the treasures of the late lamented. What those treasures are
they keep so secret that the court is maddened. In its delirium it
imagines guineas pouring out of tea-pots, crown-pieces overflowing
punch-bowls, old chairs and mattresses stuffed with Bank of England
notes. It possesses itself of the sixpenny history (with highly coloured
folding frontispiece) of Mr Daniel Dancer and his sister, and also of Mr
Elwes, of Suffolk, and transfers all the facts from those authentic
narratives to Mr Krook. Twice when the dustman is called in to carry
off a cartload of old paper, ashes, and broken bottles, the whole court
assembles and pries into the baskets as they come forth. Many times
the two gentlemen who write with the ravenous little pens on the
tissue-paper are seen prowling in the neighbourhood--shy of each
other, their late partnership being dissolved. The Sol skilfully carries a
vein of the prevailing interest through the Harmonic nights. Little
Swills, in what are professionally known as ‘patter’ allusions to the
subject, is received with loud applause; and the same vocalist ‘gags’ in
the regular business like a man inspired. Even Miss M. Melvilleson, in
the revived Caledonian melody of ‘We're a-Nodding,’ points the
sentiment that ‘the dogs love broo’ (whatever the nature of that
refreshment may be) with such archness and such a turn of the head
towards next door that she is immediately understood to mean Mr
Smallweed loves to find money, and is nightly honoured with a double
encore. For all this, the court discovers nothing; and as Mrs Piper and
Mrs Perkins now communicate to the late lodger whose appearance is
the signal for a general rally, it is in one continual ferment to discover
everything, and more.

Mr Weevle and Mr Guppy, with every eye in the court's head upon
them, knock at the closed door of the late lamented's house, in a high
state of popularity. But being contrary to the court's expectation
admitted, they immediately become unpopular and are considered to
mean no good.

The shutters are more or less closed all over the house, and the
ground-floor is sufficiently dark to require candles. Introduced into
the back shop by Mr Smallweed the younger, they, fresh from the
sunlight, can at first see nothing save darkness and shadows; but
they gradually discern the elder Mr Smallweed seated in his chair
upon the brink of a well or grave of waste-paper, the virtuous Judy
groping therein like a female sexton, and Mrs Smallweed on the level
ground in the vicinity snowed up in a heap of paper fragments, print,
and manuscript which would appear to be the accumulated
compliments that have been sent flying at her in the course of the day.
The whole party, Small included, are blackened with dust and dirt
and present a fiendish appearance not relieved by the general aspect
of the room. There is more litter and lumber in it than of old, and it is
dirtier if possible; likewise, it is ghostly with traces of its dead
inhabitant and even with his chalked writing on the wall.

On the entrance of visitors, Mr Smallweed and Judy simultaneously
fold their arms and stop in their researches.

‘Aha!’ croaks the old gentleman. ‘How de do, gentlemen, how de do!
Come to fetch your property, Mr Weevle? That's well, that's well. Ha!
Ha! We should have been forced to sell you up, sir, to pay your
warehouse room if you had left it here much longer. You feel quite at
home here again, I dare say? Glad to see you, glad to see you!’

Mr Weevle, thanking him, casts an eye about. Mr Guppy's eye follows
Mr Weevle's eye. Mr Weevle's eye comes back without any new
intelligence in it. Mr Guppy's eye comes back and meets Mr
Smallweed's eye. That engaging old gentleman is still murmuring, like
some wound-up instrument running down, ‘How de do, sir--how de--
how--’ And then having run down, he lapses into grinning silence, as
Mr Guppy starts at seeing Mr Tulkinghorn standing in the darkness
opposite with his hands behind him.
‘Gentleman so kind as to act as my Solicitor,’ says Grandfather
Smallweed. I am not the sort of client for a gentleman of such note,
but he is so good!’

Mr Guppy, slightly nudging his friend to take another look, makes a
shuffling bow to Mr Tulkinghorn, who returns it with an easy nod. Mr
Tulkinghorn is looking on as if he had nothing else to do and were
rather amused by the novelty.

‘A good deal of property here, sir, I should say,’ Mr Guppy observes to
Mr Smallweed.

‘Principally rags and rubbish, my dear friend! Rags and rubbish! Me
and Bart and my granddaughter Judy are endeavouring to make out
an inventory of what's worth anything to sell. But we haven't come to
much as yet; we--haven't--come--to--hah!’

Mr Smallweed has run down again, while Mr Weevle's eye, attended by
Mr Guppy's eye, has again gone round the room and come back.

‘Well, sir,’ says Mr Weevle. ‘We won't intrude any longer if you'll allow
us to go upstairs.’

‘Anywhere, my dear sir, anywhere! You're at home. Make yourself so,
pray!’

As they go upstairs, Mr Guppy lifts his eyebrows inquiringly and looks
at Tony. Tony shakes his head. They find the old room very dull and
dismal, with the ashes of the fire that was burning on that memorable
night yet in the discoloured grate. They have a great disinclination to
touch any object, and carefully blow the dust from it first. Nor are
they desirous to prolong their visit, packing the few movables with all
possible speed and never speaking above a whisper.

‘Look here,’ says Tony, recoiling. ‘Here's that horrible cat coming in!’

Mr Guppy retreats behind a chair. ‘Small told me of her. She went
leaping and bounding and tearing about that night like a dragon, and
got out on the house-top, and roamed about up there for a fortnight,
and then came tumbling down the chimney very thin. Did you ever
see such a brute? Looks as if she knew all about it, don't she? Almost
looks as if she was Krook. Shoohoo! Get out, you goblin!’

Lady Jane, in the doorway, with her tiger snarl from ear to ear and her
club of a tail, shows no intention of obeying; but Mr Tulkinghorn
stumbling over her, she spits at his rusty legs, and swearing
wrathfully, takes her arched back upstairs. Possibly to roam the
house-tops again and return by the chimney.
‘Mr Guppy,’ says Mr Tulkinghorn, ‘could I have a word with you?’

Mr Guppy is engaged in collecting the Galaxy Gallery of British Beauty
from the wall and depositing those works of art in their old ignoble
band-box. ‘Sir,’ he returns, reddening, I wish to act with courtesy
towards every member of the profession, and especially, I am sure,
towards a member of it so well known as yourself--I will truly add, sir,
so distinguished as yourself. Still, Mr Tulkinghorn, sir, I must
stipulate that if you have any word with me, that word is spoken in
the presence of my friend.’

‘Oh, indeed?’ says Mr Tulkinghorn.

‘Yes, sir. My reasons are not of a personal nature at all, but they are
amply sufficient for myself.’

‘No doubt, no doubt.’ Mr Tulkinghorn is as imperturbable as the
hearthstone to which he has quietly walked. ‘The matter is not of that
consequence that I need put you to the trouble of making any
conditions, Mr Guppy.’ He pauses here to smile, and his smile is as
dull and rusty as his pantaloons. ‘You are to be congratulated, Mr
Guppy; you are a fortunate young man, sir.’

‘Pretty well so, Mr Tulkinghorn; I don't complain.’

‘Complain? High friends, free admission to great houses, and access
to elegant ladies! Why, Mr Guppy, there are people in London who
would give their ears to be you.’

Mr Guppy, looking as if he would give his own reddening and still
reddening ears to be one of those people at present instead of himself,
replies, ‘Sir, if I attend to my profession and do what is right by Kenge
and Carboy, my friends and acquaintances are of no consequence to
them nor to any member of the profession, not excepting Mr
Tulkinghorn of the Fields. I am not under any obligation to explain
myself further; and with all respect for you, sir, and without offence--I
repeat, without offence--’

‘Oh, certainly!’

‘--I don't intend to do it.’

‘Quite so,’ says Mr Tulkinghorn with a calm nod. ‘Very good; I see by
these portraits that you take a strong interest in the fashionable great,

sir?’

He addresses this to the astounded Tony, who admits the soft
impeachment.
‘A virtue in which few Englishmen are deficient,’ observes Mr
Tulkinghorn. He has been standing on the hearthstone with his back
to the smoked chimney-piece, and now turns round with his glasses
to his eyes. ‘Who is this? 'Lady Dedlock.' Ha! A very good likeness in
its way, but it wants force of character. Good day to you, gentlemen;
good day!’

When he has walked out, Mr Guppy, in a great perspiration, nerves
himself to the hasty completion of the taking down of the Galaxy
Gallery, concluding with Lady Dedlock.

‘Tony,’ he says hurriedly to his astonished companion, ‘let us be quick
in putting the things together and in getting out of this place. It were
in vain longer to conceal from you, Tony, that between myself and one
of the members of a swan-like aristocracy whom I now hold in my
hand, there has been undivulged communication and association. The
time might have been when I might have revealed it to you. It never
will be more. It is due alike to the oath I have taken, alike to the
shattered idol, and alike to circumstances over which I have no
control, that the whole should be buried in oblivion. I charge you as a
friend, by the interest you have ever testified in the fashionable
intelligence, and by any little advances with which I may have been
able to accommodate you, so to bury it without a word of inquiry!’

This charge Mr Guppy delivers in a state little short of forensic lunacy,
while his friend shows a dazed mind in his whole head of hair and
even in his cultivated whiskers.
Chapter XL - National and Domestic

England has been in a dreadful state for some weeks. Lord Coodle
would go out, Sir Thomas Doodle wouldn't come in, and there being
nobody in Great Britain (to speak of) except Coodle and Doodle, there
has been no government. It is a mercy that the hostile meeting
between those two great men, which at one time seemed inevitable,
did not come off, because if both pistols had taken effect, and Coodle
and Doodle had killed each other, it is to be presumed that England
must have waited to be governed until young Coodle and young
Doodle, now in frocks and long stockings, were grown up. This
stupendous national calamity, however, was averted by Lord Coodle's
making the timely discovery that if in the heat of debate he had said
that he scorned and despised the whole ignoble career of Sir Thomas
Doodle, he had merely meant to say that party differences should
never induce him to withhold from it the tribute of his warmest
admiration; while it as opportunely turned out, on the other hand,
that Sir Thomas Doodle had in his own bosom expressly booked Lord
Coodle to go down to posterity as the mirror of virtue and honour. Still
England has been some weeks in the dismal strait of having no pilot
(as was well observed by Sir Leicester Dedlock) to weather the storm;
and the marvellous part of the matter is that England has not
appeared to care very much about it, but has gone on eating and
drinking and marrying and giving in marriage as the old world did in
the days before the flood. But Coodle knew the danger, and Doodle
knew the danger, and all their followers and hangers-on had the
clearest possible perception of the danger. At last Sir Thomas Doodle
has not only condescended to come in, but has done it handsomely,
bringing in with him all his nephews, all his male cousins, and all his
brothers-in-law. So there is hope for the old ship yet.

Doodle has found that he must throw himself upon the country,
chiefly in the form of sovereigns and beer. In this metamorphosed
state he is available in a good many places simultaneously and can
throw himself upon a considerable portion of the country at one time.
Britannia being much occupied in pocketing Doodle in the form of
sovereigns, and swallowing Doodle in the form of beer, and in
swearing herself black in the face that she does neither-- plainly to the
advancement of her glory and morality--the London season comes to a
sudden end, through all the Doodleites and Coodleites dispersing to
assist Britannia in those religious exercises.

Hence Mrs Rouncewell, housekeeper at Chesney Wold, foresees,
though no instructions have yet come down, that the family may
shortly be expected, together with a pretty large accession of cousins
and others who can in any way assist the great Constitutional work.
And hence the stately old dame, taking Time by the forelock, leads
him up and down the staircases, and along the galleries and
passages, and through the rooms, to witness before he grows any
older that everything is ready, that floors are rubbed bright, carpets
spread, curtains shaken out, beds puffed and patted, still-room and
kitchen cleared for action--all things prepared as beseems the Dedlock
dignity.

This present summer evening, as the sun goes down, the preparations
are complete. Dreary and solemn the old house looks, with so many
appliances of habitation and with no inhabitants except the pictured
forms upon the walls. So did these come and go, a Dedlock in
possession might have ruminated passing along; so did they see this
gallery hushed and quiet, as I see it now; so think, as I think, of the
gap that they would make in this domain when they were gone; so
find it, as I find it, difficult to believe that it could be without them; so
pass from my world, as I pass from theirs, now closing the
reverberating door; so leave no blank to miss them, and so die.

Through some of the fiery windows beautiful from without, and set, at
this sunset hour, not in dull-grey stone but in a glorious house of
gold, the light excluded at other windows pours in rich, lavish,
overflowing like the summer plenty in the land. Then do the frozen
Dedlocks thaw. Strange movements come upon their features as the
shadows of leaves play there. A dense justice in a corner is beguiled
into a wink. A staring baronet, with a truncheon, gets a dimple in his
chin. Down into the bosom of a stony shepherdess there steals a fleck
of light and warmth that would have done it good a hundred years
ago. One ancestress of Volumnia, in high- heeled shoes, very like her--
casting the shadow of that virgin event before her full two centuries--
shoots out into a halo and becomes a saint. A maid of honour of the
court of Charles the Second, with large round eyes (and other charms
to correspond), seems to bathe in glowing water, and it ripples as it
glows.

But the fire of the sun is dying. Even now the floor is dusky, and
shadow slowly mounts the walls, bringing the Dedlocks down like age
and death. And now, upon my Lady's picture over the great chimney-
piece, a weird shade falls from some old tree, that turns it pale, and
flutters it, and looks as if a great arm held a veil or hood, watching an
opportunity to draw it over her. Higher and darker rises shadow on
the wall--now a red gloom on the ceiling--now the fire is out.

All that prospect, which from the terrace looked so near, has moved
solemnly away and changed--not the first nor the last of beautiful
things that look so near and will so change--into a distant phantom.
Light mists arise, and the dew falls, and all the sweet scents in the
garden are heavy in the air. Now the woods settle into great masses as
if they were each one profound tree. And now the moon rises to
separate them, and to glimmer here and there in horizontal lines
behind their stems, and to make the avenue a pavement of light
among high cathedral arches fantastically broken.

Now the moon is high; and the great house, needing habitation more
than ever, is like a body without life. Now it is even awful, stealing
through it, to think of the live people who have slept in the solitary
bedrooms, to say nothing of the dead. Now is the time for shadow,
when every corner is a cavern and every downward step a pit, when
the stained glass is reflected in pale and faded hues upon the floors,
when anything and everything can be made of the heavy staircase
beams excepting their own proper shapes, when the armour has dull
lights upon it not easily to be distinguished from stealthy movement,
and when barred helmets are frightfully suggestive of heads inside.
But of all the shadows in Chesney Wold, the shadow in the long
drawing-room upon my Lady's picture is the first to come, the last to
be disturbed. At this hour and by this light it changes into threatening
hands raised up and menacing the handsome face with every breath
that stirs.

‘She is not well, ma'am,’ says a groom in Mrs Rouncewell's audience-
chamber.

‘My Lady not well! What's the matter?’

‘Why, my Lady has been but poorly, ma'am, since she was last here-- I
don't mean with the family, ma'am, but when she was here as a bird
of passage like. My Lady has not been out much, for her, and has kept
her room a good deal.’

‘Chesney Wold, Thomas,’ rejoins the housekeeper with proud
complacency, ‘will set my Lady up! There is no finer air and no
healthier soil in the world!’

Thomas may have his own personal opinions on this subject, probably
hints them in his manner of smoothing his sleek head from the nape
of his neck to his temples, but he forbears to express them further
and retires to the servants' hall to regale on cold meat-pie and ale.

This groom is the pilot-fish before the nobler shark. Next evening,
down come Sir Leicester and my Lady with their largest retinue, and
down come the cousins and others from all the points of the compass.
Thenceforth for some weeks backward and forward rush mysterious
men with no names, who fly about all those particular parts of the
country on which Doodle is at present throwing himself in an
auriferous and malty shower, but who are merely persons of a restless
disposition and never do anything anywhere.
On these national occasions Sir Leicester finds the cousins useful. A
better man than the Honourable Bob Stables to meet the Hunt at
dinner, there could not possibly be. Better got up gentlemen than the
other cousins to ride over to polling-booths and hustings here and
there, and show themselves on the side of England, it would be hard
to find. Volumnia is a little dim, but she is of the true descent; and
there are many who appreciate her sprightly conversation, her French
conundrums so old as to have become in the cycles of time almost
new again, the honour of taking the fair Dedlock in to dinner, or even
the privilege of her hand in the dance. On these national occasions
dancing may be a patriotic service, and Volumnia is constantly seen
hopping about for the good of an ungrateful and unpensioning
country.

My Lady takes no great pains to entertain the numerous guests, and
being still unwell, rarely appears until late in the day. But at all the
dismal dinners, leaden lunches, basilisk balls, and other melancholy
pageants, her mere appearance is a relief. As to Sir Leicester, he
conceives it utterly impossible that anything can be wanting, in any
direction, by any one who has the good fortune to be received under
that roof; and in a state of sublime satisfaction, he moves among the
company, a magnificent refrigerator.

Daily the cousins trot through dust and canter over roadside turf,
away to hustings and polling-booths (with leather gloves and hunting-
whips for the counties and kid gloves and riding-canes for the
boroughs), and daily bring back reports on which Sir Leicester holds
forth after dinner. Daily the restless men who have no occupation in
life present the appearance of being rather busy. Daily Volumnia has
a little cousinly talk with Sir Leicester on the state of the nation, from
which Sir Leicester is disposed to conclude that Volumnia is a more
reflecting woman than he had thought her.

‘How are we getting on?’ says Miss Volumnia, clasping her hands.
‘ARE we safe?’

The mighty business is nearly over by this time, and Doodle will throw
himself off the country in a few days more. Sir Leicester has just
appeared in the long drawing-room after dinner, a bright particular
star surrounded by clouds of cousins.

Volumnia,’ replies Sir Leicester, who has a list in his hand, ‘we are
doing tolerably.’

‘Only tolerably!’

Although it is summer weather, Sir Leicester always has his own
particular fire in the evening. He takes his usual screened seat near it
and repeats with much firmness and a little displeasure, as who
should say, I am not a common man, and when I say tolerably, it
must not be understood as a common expression, ‘Volumnia, we are
doing tolerably.’

‘At least there is no opposition to YOU,’ Volumnia asserts with
confidence.

‘No, Volumnia. This distracted country has lost its senses in many
respects, I grieve to say, but--’

‘Tt is not so mad as that. I am glad to hear it!’

Volumnia's finishing the sentence restores her to favour. Sir Leicester,
with a gracious inclination of his head, seems to say to himself, ‘A
sensible woman this, on the whole, though occasionally precipitate.’

In fact, as to this question of opposition, the fair Dedlock's observation
was superfluous, Sir Leicester on these occasions always delivering in
his own candidateship, as a kind of handsome wholesale order to be
promptly executed. Two other little seats that belong to him he treats
as retail orders of less importance, merely sending down the men and
signifying to the tradespeople, ‘You will have the goodness to make
these materials into two members of Parliament and to send them
home when done.’

T regret to say, Volumnia, that in many places the people have shown
a bad spirit, and that this opposition to the government has been of a
most determined and most implacable description.’

‘W-r-retches!’ says Volumnia.

‘Even,’ proceeds Sir Leicester, glancing at the circumjacent cousins on
sofas and ottomans, ‘even in many--in fact, in most--of those places in
which the government has carried it against a faction--’

(Note, by the way, that the Coodleites are always a faction with the
Doodleites, and that the Doodleites occupy exactly the same position
towards the Coodleites.)

“-Even in them I am shocked, for the credit of Englishmen, to be
constrained to inform you that the party has not triumphed without
being put to an enormous expense. Hundreds,’ says Sir Leicester,
eyeing the cousins with increasing dignity and swelling indignation,
‘hundreds of thousands of pounds!’

If Volumnia have a fault, it is the fault of being a trifle too innocent,
seeing that the innocence which would go extremely well with a sash
and tucker is a little out of keeping with the rouge and pearl necklace.
Howbeit, impelled by innocence, she asks, ‘What for?’

Volumnia,’ remonstrates Sir Leicester with his utmost severity.
‘Volumnia!’

‘No, no, I don't mean what for,’ cries Volumnia with her favourite little
scream. ‘How stupid I am! I mean what a pity!’

Tam glad,’ returns Sir Leicester, ‘that you do mean what a pity.’

Volumnia hastens to express her opinion that the shocking people
ought to be tried as traitors and made to support the party.

T am glad, Volumnia,’ repeats Sir Leicester, unmindful of these
mollifying sentiments, ‘that you do mean what a pity. It is disgraceful
to the electors. But as you, though inadvertently and without
intending so unreasonable a question, asked me ‘what for?’ let me
reply to you. For necessary expenses. And I trust to your good sense,
Volumnia, not to pursue the subject, here or elsewhere.’

Sir Leicester feels it incumbent on him to observe a crushing aspect
towards Volumnia because it is whispered abroad that these
necessary expenses will, in some two hundred election petitions, be
unpleasantly connected with the word bribery, and because some
graceless jokers have consequently suggested the omission from the
Church service of the ordinary supplication in behalf of the High
Court of Parliament and have recommended instead that the prayers
of the congregation be requested for six hundred and fifty-eight
gentlemen in a very unhealthy state.

T suppose,’ observes Volumnia, having taken a little time to recover
her spirits after her late castigation, I suppose Mr Tulkinghorn has
been worked to death.’

T don't know,’ says Sir Leicester, opening his eyes, ‘why Mr
Tulkinghorn should be worked to death. I don't know what Mr
Tulkinghorn's engagements may be. He is not a candidate.’

Volumnia had thought he might have been employed. Sir Leicester
could desire to know by whom, and what for. Volumnia, abashed
again, suggests, by somebody--to advise and make arrangements. Sir
Leicester is not aware that any client of Mr Tulkinghorn has been in
need of his assistance.

Lady Dedlock, seated at an open window with her arm upon its
cushioned ledge and looking out at the evening shadows falling on the
park, has seemed to attend since the lawyer's name was mentioned.
A languid cousin with a moustache in a state of extreme debility now
observes from his couch that man told him ya'as'dy that Tulkinghorn
had gone down t' that iron place t' give legal ‘pinion 'bout something,
and that contest being over t' day, 'twould be highly jawlly thing if
Tulkinghorn should 'pear with news that Coodle man was floored.

Mercury in attendance with coffee informs Sir Leicester, hereupon,
that Mr Tulkinghorn has arrived and is taking dinner. My Lady turns
her head inward for the moment, then looks out again as before.

Volumnia is charmed to hear that her delight is come. He is so
original, such a stolid creature, such an immense being for knowing
all sorts of things and never telling them! Volumnia is persuaded that
he must be a Freemason. Is sure he is at the head of a lodge, and
wears short aprons, and is made a perfect idol of with candlesticks
and trowels. These lively remarks the fair Dedlock delivers in her
youthful manner, while making a purse.

‘He has not been here once,’ she adds, ‘since I came. I really had some
thoughts of breaking my heart for the inconstant creature. I had
almost made up my mind that he was dead.’

It may be the gathering gloom of evening, or it may be the darker
gloom within herself, but a shade is on my Lady's face, as if she
thought, I would he were!’

‘Mr Tulkinghorn,’ says Sir Leicester, ‘is always welcome here and
always discreet wheresoever he is. A very valuable person, and
deservedly respected.’

The debilitated cousin supposes he is “normously rich fler.’

‘He has a stake in the country,’ says Sir Leicester, ‘I have no doubt. He
is, of course, handsomely paid, and he associates almost on a footing
of equality with the highest society.’

Everybody starts. For a gun is fired close by.

‘Good gracious, what's that?’ cries Volumnia with her little withered
scream.

‘A rat,’ says my Lady. ‘And they have shot him.’
Enter Mr Tulkinghorn, followed by Mercuries with lamps and candles.

‘No, no,’ says Sir Leicester, ‘I think not. My Lady, do you object to the
twilight?’
On the contrary, my Lady prefers it.
‘VVolumnia?’
Oh! Nothing is so delicious to Volumnia as to sit and talk in the dark.

Then take them away,’ says Sir Leicester. ‘Tulkinghorn, I beg your
pardon. How do you do?’

Mr Tulkinghorn with his usual leisurely ease advances, renders his
passing homage to my Lady, shakes Sir Leicester's hand, and
subsides into the chair proper to him when he has anything to
communicate, on the opposite side of the Baronet's little newspaper-
table. Sir Leicester is apprehensive that my Lady, not being very well,
will take cold at that open window. My Lady is obliged to him, but
would rather sit there for the air. Sir Leicester rises, adjusts her scarf
about her, and returns to his seat. Mr Tulkinghorn in the meanwhile
takes a pinch of snuff.

‘Now,’ says Sir Leicester. ‘How has that contest gone?’

‘Oh, hollow from the beginning. Not a chance. They have brought in
both their people. You are beaten out of all reason. Three to one.’

It is a part of Mr Tulkinghorn's policy and mastery to have no political
opinions; indeed, NO opinions. Therefore he says ‘you’ are beaten, and
not ‘we.’

Sir Leicester is majestically wroth. Volumnia never heard of such a
thing. "The debilitated cousin holds that it's sort of thing that's sure
tapn slongs votes--giv'n--Mob.

It's the place, you know,’ Mr Tulkinghorn goes on to say in the fast-
increasing darkness when there is silence again, ‘where they wanted
to put up Mrs Rouncewell's son.’

‘A proposal which, as you correctly informed me at the time, he had
the becoming taste and perception,’ observes Sir Leicester, ‘to decline.
I cannot say that I by any means approve of the sentiments expressed
by Mr Rouncewell when he was here for some half-hour in this room,
but there was a sense of propriety in his decision which I am glad to
acknowledge.’

‘Ha!’ says Mr Tulkinghorn. ‘Tt did not prevent him from being very
active in this election, though.’
Sir Leicester is distinctly heard to gasp before speaking. ‘Did I
understand you? Did you say that Mr Rouncewell had been very active
in this election?’

‘Uncommonly active.’
‘Against--’

‘Oh, dear yes, against you. He is a very good speaker. Plain and
emphatic. He made a damaging effect, and has great influence. In the
business part of the proceedings he carried all before him.’

It is evident to the whole company, though nobody can see him, that
Sir Leicester is staring majestically.

‘And he was much assisted,’ says Mr Tulkinghorn as a wind-up, ‘by
his son.’

‘By his son, sir?’ repeats Sir Leicester with awful politeness.

‘By his son.’

‘The son who wished to marry the young woman in my Lady's service?’
‘That son. He has but one.’

‘Then upon my honour,’ says Sir Leicester after a terrific pause during
which he has been heard to snort and felt to stare, ‘then upon my
honour, upon my life, upon my reputation and principles, the
floodgates of society are burst open, and the waters have--a--
obliterated the landmarks of the framework of the cohesion by which
things are held together!’

General burst of cousinly indignation. Volumnia thinks it is really
high time, you know, for somebody in power to step in and do
something strong. Debilitated cousin thinks--country's going-- Dayvle-
-steeple-chase pace.

T beg,’ says Sir Leicester in a breathless condition, ‘that we may not
comment further on this circumstance. Comment is superfluous. My
Lady, let me suggest in reference to that young woman--’

T have no intention,’ observes my Lady from her window in a low but
decided tone, ‘of parting with her.’

‘That was not my meaning,’ returns Sir Leicester. I am glad to hear
you say so. I would suggest that as you think her worthy of your
patronage, you should exert your influence to keep her from these
dangerous hands. You might show her what violence would be done in
such association to her duties and principles, and you might preserve
her for a better fate. You might point out to her that she probably
would, in good time, find a husband at Chesney Wold by whom she
would not be--’ Sir Leicester adds, after a moment's consideration,
‘dragged from the altars of her forefathers.’

These remarks he offers with his unvarying politeness and deference
when he addresses himself to his wife. She merely moves her head in
reply. The moon is rising, and where she sits there is a little stream of
cold pale light, in which her head is seen.

Tt is worthy of remark,’ says Mr Tulkinghorn, ‘however, that these
people are, in their way, very proud.’

‘Proud?’ Sir Leicester doubts his hearing.

T should not be surprised if they all voluntarily abandoned the girl--
yes, lover and all--instead of her abandoning them, supposing she
remained at Chesney Wold under such circumstances.’

‘Well!’ says Sir Leicester tremulously. ‘Well! You should know, Mr
Tulkinghorn. You have been among them.’

‘Really, Sir Leicester,’ returns the lawyer, IT state the fact. Why, I could
tell you a story--with Lady Dedlock's permission.’

Her head concedes it, and Volumnia is enchanted. A story! Oh, he is
going to tell something at last! A ghost in it, Volumnia hopes?

‘No. Real flesh and blood.’ Mr Tulkinghorn stops for an instant and
repeats with some little emphasis grafted upon his usual monotony,
‘Real flesh and blood, Miss Dedlock. Sir Leicester, these particulars
have only lately become known to me. They are very brief. They
exemplify what I have said. I suppress names for the present. Lady
Dedlock will not think me ill-bred, I hope?’

By the light of the fire, which is low, he can be seen looking towards
the moonlight. By the light of the moon Lady Dedlock can be seen,
perfectly still.

‘A townsman of this Mrs Rouncewell, a man in exactly parallel
circumstances as I am told, had the good fortune to have a daughter
who attracted the notice of a great lady. I speak of really a great lady,
not merely great to him, but married to a gentleman of your condition,
Sir Leicester.’
Sir Leicester condescendingly says, ‘Yes, Mr Tulkinghorn,’ implying
that then she must have appeared of very considerable moral
dimensions indeed in the eyes of an iron-master.

‘The lady was wealthy and beautiful, and had a liking for the girl, and
treated her with great kindness, and kept her always near her. Now
this lady preserved a secret under all her greatness, which she had
preserved for many years. In fact, she had in early life been engaged to
marry a young rake--he was a captain in the army-- nothing
connected with whom came to any good. She never did marry him,
but she gave birth to a child of which he was the father.’

By the light of the fire he can be seen looking towards the moonlight.
By the moonlight, Lady Dedlock can be seen in profile, perfectly still.

‘The captain in the army being dead, she believed herself safe; but a
train of circumstances with which I need not trouble you led to
discovery. As I received the story, they began in an imprudence on her
own part one day when she was taken by surprise, which shows how
difficult it is for the firmest of us (she was very firm) to be always
guarded. There was great domestic trouble and amazement, you may
suppose; I leave you to imagine, Sir Leicester, the husband's grief. But
that is not the present point. When Mr Rouncewell's townsman heard
of the disclosure, he no more allowed the girl to be patronized and
honoured than he would have suffered her to be trodden underfoot
before his eyes. Such was his pride, that he indignantly took her
away, as if from reproach and disgrace. He had no sense of the
honour done him and his daughter by the lady's condescension; not
the least. He resented the girl's position, as if the lady had been the
commonest of commoners. That is the story. I hope Lady Dedlock will
excuse its painful nature.’

There are various opinions on the merits, more or less conflicting with
Volumnia's. That fair young creature cannot believe there ever was
any such lady and rejects the whole history on the threshold. The
majority incline to the debilitated cousin's sentiment, which is in few
words--’no business--Rouncewell's fernal townsman.’ Sir Leicester
generally refers back in his mind to Wat Tyler and arranges a
sequence of events on a plan of his own.

There is not much conversation in all, for late hours have been kept at
Chesney Wold since the necessary expenses elsewhere began, and this
is the first night in many on which the family have been alone. It is
past ten when Sir Leicester begs Mr Tulkinghorn to ring for candles.
Then the stream of moonlight has swelled into a lake, and then Lady
Dedlock for the first time moves, and rises, and comes forward to a
table for a glass of water. Winking cousins, bat-like in the candle
glare, crowd round to give it; Volumnia (always ready for something
better if procurable) takes another, a very mild sip of which contents
her; Lady Dedlock, graceful, self-possessed, looked after by admiring
eyes, passes away slowly down the long perspective by the side of that
nymph, not at all improving her as a question of contrast.
Chapter XLI - In Mr Tulkinghorn's Room

Mr Tulkinghorn arrives in his turret-room a little breathed by the
journey up, though leisurely performed. There is an expression on his
face as if he had discharged his mind of some grave matter and were,
in his close way, satisfied. To say of a man so severely and strictly
self-repressed that he is triumphant would be to do him as great an
injustice as to suppose him troubled with love or sentiment or any
romantic weakness. He is sedately satisfied. Perhaps there is a rather
increased sense of power upon him as he loosely grasps one of his
veinous wrists with his other hand and holding it behind his back
walks noiselessly up and down.

There is a capacious writing-table in the room on which is a pretty
large accumulation of papers. The green lamp is lighted, his reading-
glasses lie upon the desk, the easy-chair is wheeled up to it, and it
would seem as though he had intended to bestow an hour or so upon
these claims on his attention before going to bed. But he happens not
to be in a business mind. After a glance at the documents awaiting his
notice--with his head bent low over the table, the old man's sight for
print or writing being defective at night--he opens the French window
and steps out upon the leads. There he again walks slowly up and
down in the same attitude, subsiding, if a man so cool may have any
need to subside, from the story he has related downstairs.

The time was once when men as knowing as Mr Tulkinghorn would
walk on turret-tops in the starlight and look up into the sky to read
their fortunes there. Hosts of stars are visible to-night, though their
brilliancy is eclipsed by the splendour of the moon. If he be seeking
his own star as he methodically turns and turns upon the leads, it
should be but a pale one to be so rustily represented below. If he be
tracing out his destiny, that may be written in other characters nearer
to his hand.

As he paces the leads with his eyes most probably as high above his
thoughts as they are high above the earth, he is suddenly stopped in
passing the window by two eyes that meet his own. The ceiling of his
room is rather low; and the upper part of the door, which is opposite
the window, is of glass. There is an inner baize door, too, but the night
being warm he did not close it when he came upstairs. These eyes
that meet his own are looking in through the glass from the corridor
outside. He knows them well. The blood has not flushed into his face
so suddenly and redly for many a long year as when he recognizes
Lady Dedlock.

He steps into the room, and she comes in too, closing both the doors
behind her. There is a wild disturbance--is it fear or anger?--in her
eyes. In her carriage and all else she looks as she looked downstairs
two hours ago.

Is it fear or is it anger now? He cannot be sure. Both might be as pale,
both as intent.

‘Lady Dedlock?’

She does not speak at first, nor even when she has slowly dropped
into the easy-chair by the table. They look at each other, like two
pictures.

‘Why have you told my story to so many persons?’

‘Lady Dedlock, it was necessary for me to inform you that I knew it.’
‘How long have you known it?’

T have suspected it a long while--fully known it a little while.’
‘Months?’

‘Days.’

He stands before her with one hand on a chair-back and the other in
his old-fashioned waistcoat and shirt-frill, exactly as he has stood
before her at any time since her marriage. The same formal politeness,
the same composed deference that might as well be defiance; the
whole man the same dark, cold object, at the same distance, which
nothing has ever diminished.

‘Is this true concerning the poor girl?’

He slightly inclines and advances his head as not quite understanding
the question.

‘You know what you related. Is it true? Do her friends know my story
also? Is it the town-talk yet? Is it chalked upon the walls and cried in
the streets?’

So! Anger, and fear, and shame. All three contending. What power this
woman has to keep these raging passions down! Mr Tulkinghorn's
thoughts take such form as he looks at her, with his ragged grey
eyebrows a hair's breadth more contracted than usual under her gaze.

‘No, Lady Dedlock. That was a hypothetical case, arising out of Sir
Leicester's unconsciously carrying the matter with so high a hand.
But it would be a real case if they knew--what we know.’
‘Then they do not know it yet?’
‘No.’
‘Can I save the poor girl from injury before they know it?’

‘Really, Lady Dedlock,’ Mr Tulkinghorn replies, I cannot give a
satisfactory opinion on that point.’

And he thinks, with the interest of attentive curiosity, as he watches
the struggle in her breast, ‘The power and force of this woman are
astonishing!’

‘Sir,’ she says, for the moment obliged to set her lips with all the
energy she has, that she may speak distinctly, ‘ will make it plainer. I
do not dispute your hypothetical case. I anticipated it, and felt its
truth as strongly as you can do, when I saw Mr Rouncewell here. I
knew very well that if he could have had the power of seeing me as I
was, he would consider the poor girl tarnished by having for a
moment been, although most innocently, the subject of my great and
distinguished patronage. But I have an interest in her, or I should
rather say--no longer belonging to this place--I had, and if you can
find so much consideration for the woman under your foot as to
remember that, she will be very sensible of your mercy.’

Mr Tulkinghorn, profoundly attentive, throws this off with a shrug of
self-depreciation and contracts his eyebrows a little more.

‘You have prepared me for my exposure, and I thank you for that too.
Is there anything that you require of me? Is there any claim that I can
release or any charge or trouble that I can spare my husband in
obtaining HIS release by certifying to the exactness of your discovery?
I will write anything, here and now, that you will dictate. I am ready to
do it.’

And she would do it, thinks the lawyer, watchful of the firm hand with
which she takes the pen!

T will not trouble you, Lady Dedlock. Pray spare yourself.’
T have long expected this, as you know. I neither wish to spare myself
nor to be spared. You can do nothing worse to me than you have

done. Do what remains now.’

‘Lady Dedlock, there is nothing to be done. I will take leave to say a
few words when you have finished.’
Their need for watching one another should be over now, but they do
it all this time, and the stars watch them both through the opened
window. Away in the moonlight lie the woodland fields at rest, and the
wide house is as quiet as the narrow one. The narrow one! Where are
the digger and the spade, this peaceful night, destined to add the last
great secret to the many secrets of the Tulkinghorn existence? Is the
man born yet, is the spade wrought yet? Curious questions to
consider, more curious perhaps not to consider, under the watching
stars upon a summer night.

‘Of repentance or remorse or any feeling of mine,’ Lady Dedlock
presently proceeds, T say not a word. If I were not dumb, you would
be deaf. Let that go by. It is not for your ears.’

He makes a feint of offering a protest, but she sweeps it away with her
disdainful hand.

‘Of other and very different things I come to speak to you. My jewels
are all in their proper places of keeping. They will be found there. So,
my dresses. So, all the valuables I have. Some ready money I had with
me, please to say, but no large amount. I did not wear my own dress,
in order that I might avoid observation. I went to be henceforward lost.
Make this known. I leave no other charge with you.’

‘Excuse me, Lady Dedlock,’ says Mr Tulkinghorn, quite unmoved. 1
am not sure that I understand you. You want--’

‘To be lost to all here. I leave Chesney Wold to-night. I go this hour.’
Mr Tulkinghorn shakes his head. She rises, but he, without moving
hand from chair-back or from old-fashioned waistcoat and shirt- frill,
shakes his head.

‘What? Not go as I have said?’

‘No, Lady Dedlock,’ he very calmly replies.

‘Do you know the relief that my disappearance will be? Have you
forgotten the stain and blot upon this place, and where it is, and who
it is?’

‘No, Lady Dedlock, not by any means.’

Without deigning to rejoin, she moves to the inner door and has it in
her hand when he says to her, without himself stirring hand or foot or

raising his voice, ‘Lady Dedlock, have the goodness to stop and hear
me, or before you reach the staircase I shall ring the alarm-bell and
rouse the house. And then I must speak out before every guest and
servant, every man and woman, in it.’

He has conquered her. She falters, trembles, and puts her hand
confusedly to her head. Slight tokens these in any one else, but when
so practised an eye as Mr Tulkinghorn's sees indecision for a moment
in such a subject, he thoroughly knows its value.

He promptly says again, ‘Have the goodness to hear me, Lady
Dedlock,’ and motions to the chair from which she has risen. She
hesitates, but he motions again, and she sits down.

‘The relations between us are of an unfortunate description, Lady
Dedlock; but as they are not of my making, I will not apologize for
them. The position I hold in reference to Sir Leicester is so well known
to you that I can hardly imagine but that I must long have appeared
in your eyes the natural person to make this discovery.’

‘Sir,’ she returns without looking up from the ground on which her
eyes are now fixed, IT had better have gone. It would have been far
better not to have detained me. I have no more to say.’

‘Excuse me, Lady Dedlock, if I add a little more to hear.’
T wish to hear it at the window, then. I can't breathe where I am.’

His jealous glance as she walks that way betrays an instant's
misgiving that she may have it in her thoughts to leap over, and
dashing against ledge and cornice, strike her life out upon the terrace
below. But a moment's observation of her figure as she stands in the
window without any support, looking out at the stars --not up--
gloomily out at those stars which are low in the heavens, reassures
him. By facing round as she has moved, he stands a little behind her.

‘Lady Dedlock, I have not yet been able to come to a decision
satisfactory to myself on the course before me. I am not clear what to
do or how to act next. I must request you, in the meantime, to keep
your secret as you have kept it so long and not to wonder that I keep
it too.’

He pauses, but she makes no reply.

‘Pardon me, Lady Dedlock. This is an important subject. You are
honouring me with your attention?’

IT am.’
Thank you. I might have known it from what I have seen of your
strength of character. I ought not to have asked the question, but I
have the habit of making sure of my ground, step by step, as I go on.
The sole consideration in this unhappy case is Sir Leicester.’

‘Then why,’ she asks in a low voice and without removing her gloomy
look from those distant stars, ‘do you detain me in his house?’

‘Because he IS the consideration. Lady Dedlock, I have no occasion to
tell you that Sir Leicester is a very proud man, that his reliance upon
you is implicit, that the fall of that moon out of the sky would not
amaze him more than your fall from your high position as his wife.’

She breathes quickly and heavily, but she stands as unflinchingly as
ever he has seen her in the midst of her grandest company.

T declare to you, Lady Dedlock, that with anything short of this case
that I have, I would as soon have hoped to root up by means of my
own strength and my own hands the oldest tree on this estate as to
shake your hold upon Sir Leicester and Sir Leicester's trust and
confidence in you. And even now, with this case, I hesitate. Not that
he could doubt (that, even with him, is impossible), but that nothing
can prepare him for the blow.’

‘Not my flight?’ she returned. ‘Think of it again.’

Your flight, Lady Dedlock, would spread the whole truth, and a
hundred times the whole truth, far and wide. It would be impossible
to save the family credit for a day. It is not to be thought of.’

There is a quiet decision in his reply which admits of no
remonstrance.

‘When I speak of Sir Leicester being the sole consideration, he and the
family credit are one. Sir Leicester and the baronetcy, Sir Leicester
and Chesney Wold, Sir Leicester and his ancestors and his
patrimony’--Mr Tulkinghorn very dry here--’are, I need not say to you,
Lady Dedlock, inseparable.’

‘Go on!’

‘Therefore,’ says Mr Tulkinghorn, pursuing his case in his jog- trot
style, I have much to consider. This is to be hushed up if it can be.
How can it be, if Sir Leicester is driven out of his wits or laid upon a
death-bed? If I inflicted this shock upon him to-morrow morning, how
could the immediate change in him be accounted for? What could
have caused itP What could have divided you? Lady Dedlock, the wall-
chalking and the street-crying would come on directly, and you are to
remember that it would not affect you merely (whom I cannot at all
consider in this business) but your husband, Lady Dedlock, your
husband.’

He gets plainer as he gets on, but not an atom more emphatic or
animated.

There is another point of view,’ he continues, ‘in which the case
presents itself. Sir Leicester is devoted to you almost to infatuation.
He might not be able to overcome that infatuation, even knowing what
we know. I am putting an extreme case, but it might be so. If so, it
were better that he knew nothing. Better for common sense, better for
him, better for me. I must take all this into account, and it combines
to render a decision very difficult.’

She stands looking out at the same stars without a word. They are
beginning to pale, and she looks as if their coldness froze her.

‘My experience teaches me,’ says Mr Tulkinghorn, who has by this
time got his hands in his pockets and is going on in his business
consideration of the matter like a machine. ‘My experience teaches
me, Lady Dedlock, that most of the people I know would do far better
to leave marriage alone. It is at the bottom of three fourths of their
troubles. So I thought when Sir Leicester married, and so I always
have thought since. No more about that. I must now be guided by
circumstances. In the meanwhile I must beg you to keep your own
counsel, and I will keep mine.’

T am to drag my present life on, holding its pains at your pleasure,
day by day?’ she asks, still looking at the distant sky.

Yes, Iam afraid so, Lady Dedlock.’

Tt is necessary, you think, that I should be so tied to the stake?’

Tam sure that what I recommend is necessary.’

T am to remain on this gaudy platform on which my miserable
deception has been so long acted, and it is to fall beneath me when

you give the signal?’ she said slowly.

‘Not without notice, Lady Dedlock. I shall take no step without
forewarning you.’

She asks all her questions as if she were repeating them from memory
or calling them over in her sleep. ‘We are to meet as usual?’

‘Precisely as usual, if you please.’
‘And I am to hide my guilt, as I have done so many years?’

‘As you have done so many years. I should not have made that
reference myself, Lady Dedlock, but I may now remind you that your
secret can be no heavier to you than it was, and is no worse and no
better than it was. I know it certainly, but I believe we have never
wholly trusted each other.’

She stands absorbed in the same frozen way for some little time before
asking, Is there anything more to be sald to-night?’

Why,’ Mr Tulkinghorn returns methodically as he softly rubs his
hands, ‘I should like to be assured of your acquiescence in my
arrangements, Lady Dedlock.’

‘You may be assured of it.’

‘Good. And I would wish in conclusion to remind you, as a business
precaution, in case it should be necessary to recall the fact in any
communication with Sir Leicester, that throughout our interview I
have expressly stated my sole consideration to be Sir Leicester's
feelings and honour and the family reputation. I should have been
happy to have made Lady Dedlock a prominent consideration, too, if
the case had admitted of it; but unfortunately it does not.’

Tcan attest your fidelity, sir.’

Both before and after saying it she remains absorbed, but at length
moves, and turns, unshaken in her natural and acquired presence,
towards the door. Mr Tulkinghorn opens both the doors exactly as he
would have done yesterday, or as he would have done ten years ago,
and makes his old-fashioned bow as she passes out. It is not an
ordinary look that he receives from the handsome face as it goes into
the darkness, and it is not an ordinary movement, though a very
slight one, that acknowledges his courtesy. But as he reflects when he
is left alone, the woman has been putting no common constraint upon
herself.

He would know it all the better if he saw the woman pacing her own
rooms with her hair wildly thrown from her flung-back face, her
hands clasped behind her head, her figure twisted as if by pain. He
would think so all the more if he saw the woman thus hurrying up
and down for hours, without fatigue, without intermission, followed by
the faithful step upon the Ghost's Walk. But he shuts out the now
chilled air, draws the window-curtain, goes to bed, and falls asleep.
And truly when the stars go out and the wan day peeps into the
turret-chamber, finding him at his oldest, he looks as if the digger and
the spade were both commissioned and would soon be digging.
The same wan day peeps in at Sir Leicester pardoning the repentant
country in a majestically condescending dream; and at the cousins
entering on various public employments, principally receipt of salary;
and at the chaste Volumnia, bestowing a dower of fifty thousand
pounds upon a hideous old general with a mouth of false teeth like a
pianoforte too full of keys, long the admiration of Bath and the terror
of every other community. Also into rooms high in the roof, and into
offices in court-yards, and over stables, where humbler ambition
dreams of bliss, in keepers' lodges, and in holy matrimony with Will or
Sally. Up comes the bright sun, drawing everything up with it--the
Wills and Sallys, the latent vapour in the earth, the drooping leaves
and flowers, the birds and beasts and creeping things, the gardeners
to sweep the dewy turf and unfold emerald velvet where the roller
passes, the smoke of the great kitchen fire wreathing itself straight
and high into the lightsome air. Lastly, up comes the flag over Mr
Tulkinghorn's unconscious head cheerfully proclaiming that Sir
Leicester and Lady Dedlock are in their happy home and that there is
hospitality at the place in Lincolnshire.
CHAPTER XLII - In Mr Tulkinghorn's Chambers

From the verdant undulations and the spreading oaks of the Dedlock
property, Mr Tulkinghorn transfers himself to the stale heat and dust
of London. His manner of coming and going between the two places is
one of his impenetrabilities. He walks into Chesney Wold as if it were
next door to his chambers and returns to his chambers as if he had
never been out of Lincoln's Inn Fields. He neither changes his dress
before the journey nor talks of it afterwards. He melted out of his
turret-room this morning, just as now, in the late twilight, he melts
into his own square.

Like a dingy London bird among the birds at roost in these pleasant
fields, where the sheep are all made into parchment, the goats into
wigs, and the pasture into chaff, the lawyer, smoke-dried and faded,
dwelling among mankind but not consorting with them, aged without
experience of genial youth, and so long used to make his cramped
nest in holes and corners of human nature that he has forgotten its
broader and better range, comes sauntering home. In the oven made
by the hot pavements and hot buildings, he has baked himself dryer
than usual; and he has in his thirsty mind his mellowed port-wine
half a century old.

The lamplighter is skipping up and down his ladder on Mr
Tulkinghorn's side of the Fields when that high-priest of noble
mysteries arrives at his own dull court-yard. He ascends the door-
steps and is gliding into the dusky hall when he encounters, on the
top step, a bowing and propitiatory little man.

Is that Snagsby?’

‘Yes, sir. I hope you are well, sir. I was just giving you up, sir, and
going home.’

‘Aye? What is it? What do you want with me?’

‘Well, sir,’ says Mr Snagsby, holding his hat at the side of his head in
his deference towards his best customer, I was wishful to say a word
to you, sir.’

‘Can you say it here?’

‘Perfectly, sir.’

‘Say it then.’ The lawyer turns, leans his arms on the iron railing at

the top of the steps, and looks at the lamplighter lighting the court-
yard.
Tt is relating,’ says Mr Snagsby in a mysterious low voice, ‘it is
relating--not to put too fine a point upon it--to the foreigner, sir!’

Mr Tulkinghorn eyes him with some surprise. ‘What foreigner?’

The foreign female, sir. French, if I don't mistake? I am _ not
acquainted with that language myself, but I should judge from her
manners and appearance that she was French; anyways, certainly
foreign. Her that was upstairs, sir, when Mr Bucket and me had the
honour of waiting upon you with the sweeping-boy that night.’

‘Oh! Yes, yes. Mademoiselle Hortense.’

‘Indeed, sir?’ Mr Snagsby coughs his cough of submission behind his
hat. I am not acquainted myself with the names of foreigners in
general, but I have no doubt it WOULD be that.’ Mr Snagsby appears
to have set out in this reply with some desperate design of repeating
the name, but on reflection coughs again to excuse himself.

‘And what can you have to say, Snagsby,’ demands Mr Tulkinghorn,
‘about her?’

‘Well, sir,’ returns the stationer, shading his communication with his
hat, ‘it falls a little hard upon me. My domestic happiness is very
great--at least, it's as great as can be expected, I'm sure-- but my little
woman is rather given to jealousy. Not to put too fine a point upon it,
she is very much given to jealousy. And you see, a foreign female of
that genteel appearance coming into the shop, and hovering--I should
be the last to make use of a strong expression if I could avoid it, but
hovering, sir--in the court-- you know it is--now ain't it? I only put it
to yourself, sir.’

Mr Snagsby, having said this in a very plaintive manner, throws in a
cough of general application to fill up all the blanks.

‘Why, what do you mean?’ asks Mr Tulkinghorn.

Just so, sir,’ returns Mr Snagsby; I was sure you would feel it
yourself and would excuse the reasonableness of MY feelings when
coupled with the known excitableness of my little woman. You see, the
foreign female--which you mentioned her name just now, with quite a
native sound I am sure--caught up the word Snagsby that night, being
uncommon quick, and made inquiry, and got the direction and come
at dinner-time. Now Guster, our young woman, is timid and has fits,
and she, taking fright at the foreigner's looks--which are fierce--and at
a grinding manner that she has of speaking--which is calculated to
alarm a weak mind--gave way to it, instead of bearing up against it,
and tumbled down the kitchen stairs out of one into another, such fits
as I do sometimes think are never gone into, or come out of, in any
house but ours. Consequently there was by good fortune ample
occupation for my little woman, and only me to answer the shop.
When she DID say that Mr Tulkinghorn, being always denied to her by
his employer (which I had no doubt at the time was a foreign mode of
viewing a clerk), she would do herself the pleasure of continually
calling at my place until she was let in here. Since then she has been,
as I began by saying, hovering, hovering, sir--Mr Snagsby repeats the
word with pathetic emphasis--’in the court. The effects of which
movement it is impossible to calculate. I shouldn't wonder if it might
have already given rise to the painfullest mistakes even in the
neighbours' minds, not mentioning (if such a thing was possible) my
little woman. Whereas, goodness knows,’ says Mr Snagsby, shaking
his head, ‘I never had an idea of a foreign female, except as being
formerly connected with a bunch of brooms and a baby, or at the
present time with a tambourine and earrings. I never had, I do assure
you, sir!’

Mr Tulkinghorn had listened gravely to this complaint and inquires
when the stationer has finished, ‘And that's all, is it, Snagsby?’

‘Why yes, sir, that's all,’ says Mr Snagsby, ending with a cough that
plainly adds, ‘and it's enough too--for me.’

T don't know what Mademoiselle Hortense may want or mean, unless
she is mad,’ says the lawyer.

‘Even if she was, you know, sir,’ Mr Snagsby pleads, ‘it wouldn't be a
consolation to have some weapon or another in the form of a foreign
dagger planted in the family.’

‘No,’ says the other. ‘Well, well! This shall be stopped. I am sorry you
have been inconvenienced. If she comes again, send her here.’

Mr Snagsby, with much bowing and short apologetic coughing, takes
his leave, lightened in heart. Mr Tulkinghorn goes upstairs, saying to
himself, These women were created to give trouble the whole earth
over. The mistress not being enough to deal with, here's the maid now!
But I will be short with THIS jade at least!’

So saying, he unlocks his door, gropes his way into his murky rooms,
lights his candles, and looks about him. It is too dark to see much of
the Allegory overhead there, but that importunate Roman, who is for
ever toppling out of the clouds and pointing, is at his old work pretty
distinctly. Not honouring him with much attention, Mr Tulkinghorn
takes a small key from his pocket, unlocks a drawer in which there is
another key, which unlocks a chest in which there is another, and so
comes to the cellar-key, with which he prepares to descend to the
regions of old wine. He is going towards the door with a candle in his
hand when a knock comes.

‘Who's this? Aye, aye, mistress, it's you, is it? You appear at a good
time. I have just been hearing of you. Now! What do you want?’

He stands the candle on the chimney-piece in the clerk's hall and taps
his dry cheek with the key as he addresses these words of welcome to
Mademoiselle Hortense. That feline personage, with her lips tightly
shut and her eyes looking out at him sideways, softly closes the door
before replying.

T have had great deal of trouble to find you, sir.’
‘HAVE you!’

T have been here very often, sir. It has always been said to me, he is
not at home, he is engage, he is this and that, he is not for you.’

‘Quite right, and quite true.’
‘Not true. Lies!’

At times there is a suddenness in the manner of Mademoiselle
Hortense so like a bodily spring upon the subject of it that such
subject involuntarily starts and fails back. It is Mr Tulkinghorn's case
at present, though Mademoiselle Hortense, with her eyes almost shut
up (but still looking out sideways), is only smiling contemptuously and
shaking her head.

‘Now, mistress,’ says the lawyer, tapping the key hastily upon the
chimney-piece. ‘If you have anything to say, say it, say it.’

‘Sir, you have not use me well. You have been mean and shabby.’

‘Mean and shabby, eh?’ returns the lawyer, rubbing his nose with the
key.

‘Yes. What is it that I tell you? You know you have. You have
attrapped me--catched me--to give you information; you have asked
me to show you the dress of mine my Lady must have wore that night,
you have prayed me to come in it here to meet that boy. Say! Is it not?’
Mademoiselle Hortense makes another spring.

‘You are a vixen, a vixen!’ Mr Tulkinghorn seems to meditate as he
looks distrustfully at her, then he replies, ‘Well, wench, well. I paid

?

you.
‘You paid me!’ she repeats with fierce disdain. ‘Two sovereign! I have
not change them, I re-fuse them, I des-pise them, I throw them from
me!’ Which she literally does, taking them out of her bosom as she
speaks and flinging them with such violence on the floor that they jerk
up again into the light before they roll away into corners and slowly
settle down there after spinning vehemently.

‘Now!’ says Mademoiselle Hortense, darkening her large eyes again.
‘You have paid me? Eh, my God, oh yes!’

Mr Tulkinghorn rubs his head with the key while she entertains
herself with a sarcastic laugh.

‘You must be rich, my fair friend,’ he composedly observes, ‘to throw
money about in that way!’

T AM rich,’ she returns. ‘I am very rich in hate. I hate my Lady, of all
my heart. You know that.’

‘Know it? How should I know it?’

‘Because you have known it perfectly before you prayed me to give you
that information. Because you have known perfectly that I was en-r-r-
r-raged!’ It appears impossible for mademoiselle to roll the letter ‘r’
sufficiently in this word, notwithstanding that she assists her
energetic delivery by clenching both her hands and setting all her
teeth.

‘Oh! I knew that, did I?’ says Mr Tulkinghorn, examining the wards of
the key.

Yes, without doubt. I am not blind. You have made sure of me
because you knew that. You had reason! I det-est her.’ Mademoiselle
folds her arms and throws this last remark at him over one of her
shoulders.

‘Having said this, have you anything else to say, mademoiselle?’

T am not yet placed. Place me well. Find me a good condition! If you
cannot, or do not choose to do that, employ me to pursue her, to
chase her, to disgrace and to dishonour her. I will help you well, and
with a good will. It is what YOU do. Do I not know that?’

‘You appear to know a good deal,’ Mr Tulkinghorn retorts.
‘Do I not? Is it that I am so weak as to believe, like a child, that I come

here in that dress to rec-eive that boy only to decide a little bet, a
wager? Eh, my God, oh yes!’ In this reply, down to the word ‘wager’
inclusive, mademoiselle has been ironically polite and tender, then as
suddenly dashed into the bitterest and most defiant scorn, with her
black eyes in one and the same moment very nearly shut and
staringly wide open.

‘Now, let us see,’ says Mr Tulkinghorn, tapping his chin with the key
and looking imperturbably at her, ‘how this matter stands.’

‘Ah! Let us see,’ mademoiselle assents, with many angry and tight
nods of her head.

‘You come here to make a remarkably modest demand, which you
have just stated, and it not being conceded, you will come again.’

‘And again,’ says mademoiselle with more tight and angry nods. ‘And
yet again. And yet again. And many times again. In effect, for ever!’

‘And not only here, but you will go to Mr Snagsby's too, perhaps? That
visit not succeeding either, you will go again perhaps?’

‘And again,’ repeats mademoiselle, cataleptic with determination. ‘And
yet again. And yet again. And many times again. In effect, for ever!’

Very well. Now, Mademoiselle Hortense, let me recommend you to
take the candle and pick up that money of yours. I think you will find
it behind the clerk's partition in the corner yonder.’

She merely throws a laugh over her shoulder and stands her ground
with folded arms.

‘You will not, eh?’
‘No, I will not!’

‘So much the poorer you; so much the richer I! Look, mistress, this is
the key of my wine-cellar. It is a large key, but the keys of prisons are
larger. In this city there are houses of correction (where the treadmills
are, for women), the gates of which are very strong and heavy, and no
doubt the keys too. I am afraid a lady of your spirit and activity would
find it an inconvenience to have one of those keys turned upon her for
any length of time. What do you think?’

T think,’ mademoiselle replies without any action and in a clear,
obliging voice, ‘that you are a miserable wretch.’

‘Probably,’ returns Mr Tulkinghorn, quietly blowing his nose. ‘But I
don't ask what you think of myself; I ask what you think of the
prison.’
‘Nothing. What does it matter to me?’

‘Why, it matters this much, mistress,’ says the lawyer, deliberately
putting away his handkerchief and adjusting his frill; ‘the law is so
despotic here that it interferes to prevent any of our good English
citizens from being troubled, even by a lady's visits against his desire.
And on his complaining that he is so troubled, it takes hold of the
troublesome lady and shuts her up in prison under hard discipline.
Turns the key upon her, mistress.’ Illustrating with the cellar-key.

Truly?’ returns mademoiselle in the same pleasant voice. ‘That is
droll! But--my faith!--still what does it matter to me?’

‘My fair friend,’ says Mr Tulkinghorn, ‘make another visit here, or at
Mr Snagsby's, and you shall learn.’

In that case you will send me to the prison, perhaps?’
‘Perhaps.’

It would be contradictory for one in mademoiselle's state of agreeable
jocularity to foam at the mouth, otherwise a tigerish expansion
thereabouts might look as if a very little more would make her do it.

In a word, mistress,’ says Mr Tulkinghorn, TI am sorry to be unpolite,
but if you ever present yourself uninvited here--or there--again, I will
give you over to the police. Their gallantry is great, but they carry
troublesome people through the streets in an ignominious manner,
strapped down on a board, my good wench.’

T will prove you,’ whispers mademoiselle, stretching out her hand, 1
will try if you dare to do it!’

‘And if,’ pursues the lawyer without minding her, T place you in that
good condition of being locked up in jail, it will be some time before
you find yourself at liberty again.’

T will prove you,’ repeats mademoiselle in her former whisper.

‘And now,” proceeds the lawyer, still without minding her, ‘you had
better go. Think twice before you come here again.’

‘Think you,’ she answers, ‘twice two hundred times!’
‘You were dismissed by your lady, you know,’ Mr Tulkinghorn

observes, following her out upon the staircase, ‘as the most
implacable and unmanageable of women. Now turn over a new leaf
and take warning by what I say to you. For what I say, I mean; and
what I threaten, I will do, mistress.’

She goes down without answering or looking behind her. When she is
gone, he goes down too, and returning with his cobweb-covered bottle,
devotes himself to a leisurely enjoyment of its contents, now and then,
as he throws his head back in his chair, catching sight of the
pertinacious Roman pointing from the ceiling.
CHAPTER XLIII - Esther's Narrative

It matters little now how much I thought of my living mother who had
told me evermore to consider her dead. I could not venture to
approach her or to communicate with her in writing, for my sense of
the peril in which her life was passed was only to be equalled by my
fears of increasing it. Knowing that my mere existence as a living
creature was an unforeseen danger in her way, I could not always
conquer that terror of myself which had seized me when I first knew
the secret. At no time did I dare to utter her name. I felt as if I did not
even dare to hear it. If the conversation anywhere, when I was
present, took that direction, as it sometimes naturally did, I tried not
to hear: I mentally counted, repeated something that I knew, or went
out of the room. I am conscious now that I often did these things
when there can have been no danger of her being spoken of, but I did
them in the dread I had of hearing anything that might lead to her
betrayal, and to her betrayal through me.

It matters little now how often I recalled the tones of my mother's
voice, wondered whether I should ever hear it again as I so longed to
do, and thought how strange and desolate it was that it should be so
new to me. It matters little that I watched for every public mention of
my mother's name; that I passed and repassed the door of her house
in town, loving it, but afraid to look at it; that I once sat in the theatre
when my mother was there and saw me, and when we were so wide
asunder before the great company of all degrees that any link or
confidence between us seemed a dream. It is all, all over. My lot has
been so blest that I can relate little of myself which is not a story of
goodness and generosity in others. I may well pass that little and go
on.

When we were settled at home again, Ada and I had many
conversations with my guardian of which Richard was the theme. My
dear girl was deeply grieved that he should do their kind cousin so
much wrong, but she was so faithful to Richard that she could not
bear to blame him even for that. My guardian was assured of it, and
never coupled his name with a word of reproof. ‘Rick is mistaken, my
dear,’ he would say to her. ‘Well, well! We have all been mistaken over
and over again. We must trust to you and time to set him right.’

We knew afterwards what we suspected then, that he did not trust to
time until he had often tried to open Richard's eyes. That he had
written to him, gone to him, talked with him, tried every gentle and
persuasive art his kindness could devise. Our poor devoted Richard
was deaf and blind to all. If he were wrong, he would make amends
when the Chancery suit was over. If he were groping in the dark, he
could not do better than do his utmost to clear away those clouds in
which so much was confused and obscured. Suspicion and
misunderstanding were the fault of the suit? Then let him work the
suit out and come through it to his right mind. This was his
unvarying reply. Jarndyce and Jarndyce had obtained such
possession of his whole nature that it was impossible to place any
consideration before him which he did not, with a distorted kind of
reason, make a new argument in favour of his doing what he did. ‘So
that it is even more mischievous,’ said my guardian once to me, ‘to
remonstrate with the poor dear fellow than to leave him alone.’

I took one of these opportunities of mentioning my doubts of Mr
Skimpole as a good adviser for Richard.

‘Adviser!’ returned my guardian, laughing, ‘My dear, who would advise
with Skimpole?’

‘Encourager would perhaps have been a better word,’ said I.

‘Encourager!’ returned my guardian again. ‘Who could be encouraged
by Skimpole?’

Not Richard?’ I asked.

‘No,’ he replied. ‘Such an unworldly, uncalculating, gossamer creature
is a relief to him and an amusement. But as to advising or
encouraging or occupying a serious station towards anybody or
anything, it is simply not to be thought of in such a child as
Skimpole.’

‘Pray, cousin John,’ said Ada, who had just joined us and now looked
over my shoulder, ‘what made him such a child?’

‘What made him such a child?’ inquired my guardian, rubbing his
head, a little at a loss.

‘Yes, cousin John.’

‘Why,’ he slowly replied, roughening his head more and more, ‘he is all
sentiment, and--and susceptibility, and--and sensibility, and-- and
imagination. And these qualities are not regulated in him, somehow. I
suppose the people who admired him for them in his youth attached
too much importance to them and too little to any training that would
have balanced and adjusted them, and so he became what he is. Hey?’
said my guardian, stopping short and looking at us hopefully. ‘What
do you think, you two?’

Ada, glancing at me, said she thought it was a pity he should be an
expense to Richard.
‘So it is, so it is,’ returned my guardian hurriedly. ‘That must not be.
We must arrange that. I must prevent it. That will never do.’

And I said I thought it was to be regretted that he had ever introduced
Richard to Mr Vholes for a present of five pounds.

‘Did he?’ said my guardian with a passing shade of vexation on his
face. ‘But there you have the man. There you have the man! There is
nothing mercenary in that with him. He has no idea of the value of
money. He introduces Rick, and then he is good friends with Mr
Vholes and borrows five pounds of him. He means nothing by it and
thinks nothing of it. He told you himself, I'll be bound, my dear?’

‘Oh, yes!’ said I.

‘Exactly!’ cried my guardian, quite triumphant. ‘There you have the
man! If he had meant any harm by it or was conscious of any harm in
it, he wouldn't tell it. He tells it as he does it in mere simplicity. But
you shall see him in his own home, and then you'll understand him
better. We must pay a visit to Harold Skimpole and caution him on
these points. Lord bless you, my dears, an infant, an infant!’

In pursuance of this plan, we went into London on an early day and
presented ourselves at Mr Skimpole's door.

He lived in a place called the Polygon, in Somers Town, where there
were at that time a number of poor Spanish refugees walking about in
cloaks, smoking little paper cigars. Whether he was a better tenant
than one might have supposed, in consequence of his friend
Somebody always paying his rent at last, or whether his inaptitude for
business rendered it particularly difficult to turn him out, I don't
know; but he had occupied the same house some years. It was in a
state of dilapidation quite equal to our expectation. Two or three of the
area railings were gone, the water-butt was broken, the knocker was
loose, the bell-handle had been pulled off a long time to judge from the
rusty state of the wire, and dirty footprints on the steps were the only
signs of its being inhabited.

A slatternly full-blown girl who seemed to be bursting out at the rents
in her gown and the cracks in her shoes like an over-ripe berry
answered our knock by opening the door a very little way and
stopping up the gap with her figure. As she knew Mr Jarndyce (indeed
Ada and I both thought that she evidently associated him with the
receipt of her wages), she immediately relented and allowed us to pass
in. The lock of the door being in a disabled condition, she then applied
herself to securing it with the chain, which was not in good action
either, and said would we go upstairs?
We went upstairs to the first floor, still seeing no other furniture than
the dirty footprints. Mr Jarndyce without further ceremony entered a
room there, and we followed. It was dingy enough and not at all clean,
but furnished with an odd kind of shabby luxury, with a large
footstool, a sofa, and plenty of cushions, an easy-chair, and plenty of
pillows, a piano, books, drawing materials, music, newspapers, and a
few sketches and pictures. A broken pane of glass in one of the dirty
windows was papered and wafered over, but there was a little plate of
hothouse nectarines on the table, and there was another of grapes,
and another of sponge-cakes, and there was a bottle of light wine. Mr
Skimpole himself reclined upon the sofa in a dressing-gown, drinking
some fragrant coffee from an old china cup--it was then about mid-
day--and looking at a collection of wallflowers in the balcony.

He was not in the least disconcerted by our appearance, but rose and
received us in his usual airy manner.

‘Here I am, you see!’ he said when we were seated, not without some
little difficulty, the greater part of the chairs being broken. ‘Here I am!
This is my frugal breakfast. Some men want legs of beef and mutton
for breakfast; I don't. Give me my peach, my cup of coffee, and my
claret; I am content. I don't want them for themselves, but they
remind me of the sun. There's nothing solar about legs of beef and
mutton. Mere animal satisfaction!’

This is our friend's consulting-room (or would be, if he ever
prescribed), his sanctum, his studio,’ said my guardian to us.

Yes,’ said Mr Skimpole, turning his bright face about, ‘this is the
bird's cage. This is where the bird lives and sings. They pluck his
feathers now and then and clip his wings, but he sings, he sings!’

He handed us the grapes, repeating in his radiant way, ‘He sings! Not
an ambitious note, but still he sings.’

‘These are very fine,’ said my guardian. ‘A present?’

‘No,’ he answered. ‘No! Some amiable gardener sells them. His man
wanted to know, when he brought them last evening, whether he
should wait for the money. ‘Really, my friend,' I said, 'I think not--if
your time is of any value to you.' I suppose it was, for he went away.’

My guardian looked at us with a smile, as though he asked us, ‘s it
possible to be worldly with this baby?’

This is a day,’ said Mr Skimpole, gaily taking a little claret in a
tumbler, ‘that will ever be remembered here. We shall call it Saint
Clare and Saint Summerson day. You must see my daughters. I have
a blue-eyed daughter who is my Beauty daughter, I have a Sentiment
daughter, and I have a Comedy daughter. You must see them all.
They'll be enchanted.’

He was going to summon them when my guardian interposed and
asked him to pause a moment, as he wished to say a word to him
first. ‘My dear Jarndyce,’ he cheerfully replied, going back to his sofa,
‘as many moments as you please. Time is no object here. We never
know what o'clock it is, and we never care. Not the way to get on in
life, you'll tell me? Certainly. But we DON'T get on in life. We don't
pretend to do it.’

My guardian looked at us again, plainly saying, ‘You hear him?’
‘Now, Harold,’ he began, ‘the word I have to say relates to Rick.’

‘The dearest friend I have!’ returned Mr Skimpole cordially. ‘I suppose
he ought not to be my dearest friend, as he is not on terms with you.
But he is, I can't help it; he is full of youthful poetry, and I love him. If
you don't like it, I can't help it. I love him.’

The engaging frankness with which he made this declaration really
had a disinterested appearance and captivated my guardian, if not, for
the moment, Ada too.

‘YYou are welcome to love him as much as you like,’ returned Mr
Jarndyce, ‘but we must save his pocket, Harold.’

‘Oh!’ said Mr Skimpole. ‘His pocket? Now you are coming to what I
don't understand.’ Taking a little more claret and dipping one of the
cakes in it, he shook his head and smiled at Ada and me with an
ingenuous foreboding that he never could be made to understand.

Tf you go with him here or there,’ said my guardian plainly, ‘you must
not let him pay for both.’

‘My dear Jarndyce,’ returned Mr Skimpole, his genial face irradiated
by the comicality of this idea, ‘what am I to do? If he takes me
anywhere, I must go. And how can I pay? I never have any money. If I
had any money, I don't know anything about it. Suppose I say to a
man, how much? Suppose the man says to me seven and sixpence? I
know nothing about seven and sixpence. It is impossible for me to
pursue the subject with any consideration for the man. I don't go
about asking busy people what seven and sixpence is in Moorish--
which I don't understand. Why should I go about asking them what
seven and sixpence is in Money--which I don't understand?’
‘Well,’ said my guardian, by no means displeased with this artless
reply, ‘if you come to any kind of journeying with Rick, you must
borrow the money of me (never breathing the least allusion to that
circumstance), and leave the calculation to him.’

‘My dear Jarndyce,’ returned Mr Skimpole, T will do anything to give
you pleasure, but it seems an idle form--a superstition. Besides, I give
you my word, Miss Clare and my dear Miss Summerson, I thought Mr
Carstone was immensely rich. I thought he had only to make over
something, or to sign a bond, or a draft, or a cheque, or a bill, or to
put something on a file somewhere, to bring down a shower of money.’

Indeed it is not so, sir,’ said Ada. ‘He is poor.’

‘No, really?’ returned Mr Skimpole with his bright smile. ‘You surprise

?

me.

‘And not being the richer for trusting in a rotten reed,’ said my
guardian, laying his hand emphatically on the sleeve of Mr Skimpole's
dressing-gown, ‘be you very careful not to encourage him in that
reliance, Harold.’

‘My dear good friend,’ returned Mr Skimpole, ‘and my dear Miss
Simmerson, and my dear Miss Clare, how can I do that? It's business,
and I don't know business. It is he who encourages me. He emerges
from great feats of business, presents the brightest prospects before
me as their result, and calls upon me to admire them. I do admire
them--as bright prospects. But I know no more about them, and I tell
him so.’

The helpless kind of candour with which he presented this before us,
the light-hearted manner in which he was amused by his innocence,
the fantastic way in which he took himself under his own protection
and argued about that curious person, combined with the delightful
ease of everything he said exactly to make out my guardian's case.
The more I saw of him, the more unlikely it seemed to me, when he
was present, that he could design, conceal, or influence anything; and
yet the less likely that appeared when he was not present, and the
less agreeable it was to think of his having anything to do with any
one for whom I cared.

Hearing that his examination (as he called it) was now over, Mr
Skimpole left the room with a radiant face to fetch his daughters (his
sons had run away at various times), leaving my guardian quite
delighted by the manner in which he had vindicated his childish
character. He soon came back, bringing with him the three young
ladies and Mrs Skimpole, who had once been a beauty but was now a
delicate high-nosed invalid suffering under a complication of
disorders.

‘This,’ said Mr Skimpole, ‘is my Beauty daughter, Arethusa--plays and
sings odds and ends like her father. This is my Sentiment daughter,
Laura--plays a little but don't sing. This is my Comedy daughter,
Kitty--sings a little but don't play. We all draw a little and compose a
little, and none of us have any idea of time or money.’

Mrs Skimpole sighed, I thought, as if she would have been glad to
strike out this item in the family attainments. I also thought that she
rather impressed her sigh upon my guardian and that she took every
opportunity of throwing in another.

Tt is pleasant,’ said Mr Skimpole, turning his sprightly eyes from one
to the other of us, ‘and it is whimsically interesting to trace
peculiarities in families. In this family we are all children, and I am
the youngest.’

The daughters, who appeared to be very fond of him, were amused by
this droll fact, particularly the Comedy daughter.

‘My dears, it is true,’ said Mr Skimpole, ‘is it not? So it is, and so it
must be, because like the dogs in the hymn, 'it is our nature to.' Now,
here is Miss Summerson with a fine administrative capacity and a
knowledge of details perfectly surprising. It will sound very strange in
Miss Summerson's ears, I dare say, that we know nothing about
chops in this house. But we don't, not the least. We can't cook
anything whatever. A needle and thread we don't know how to use. We
admire the people who possess the practical wisdom we want, but we
don't quarrel with them. Then why should they quarrel with us? Live
and let live, we say to them. Live upon your practical wisdom, and let
us live upon you!’

He laughed, but as usual seemed quite candid and really to mean
what he said.

‘We have sympathy, my roses,’ said Mr Skimpole, ‘sympathy for
everything. Have we not?’

‘Oh, yes, papa!’ cried the three daughters.

In fact, that is our family department,’ said Mr Skimpole, ‘in this
hurly-burly of life. We are capable of looking on and of being
interested, and we DO look on, and we ARE interested. What more
can we do? Here is my Beauty daughter, married these three years.
Now I dare say her marrying another child, and having two more, was
all wrong in point of political economy, but it was very agreeable. We
had our little festivities on those occasions and exchanged social
ideas. She brought her young husband home one day, and they and
their young fledglings have their nest upstairs. I dare say at some time
or other Sentiment and Comedy will bring THEIR husbands home and
have THEIR nests upstairs too. So we get on, we don't know how, but
somehow.’

She looked very young indeed to be the mother of two children, and I
could not help pitying both her and them. It was evident that the three
daughters had grown up as they could and had had just as little
haphazard instruction as qualified them to be their father's playthings
in his idlest hours. His pictorial tastes were consulted, I observed, in
their respective styles of wearing their hair, the Beauty daughter being
in the classic manner, the Sentiment daughter luxuriant and flowing,
and the Comedy daughter in the arch style, with a good deal of
sprightly forehead, and vivacious little curls dotted about the corners
of her eyes. They were dressed to correspond, though in a most untidy
and negligent way.

Ada and I conversed with these young ladies and found them
wonderfully like their father. In the meanwhile Mr Jarndyce (who had
been rubbing his head to a great extent, and hinted at a change in the
wind) talked with Mrs Skimpole in a corner, where we could not help
hearing the chink of money. Mr Skimpole had previously volunteered
to go home with us and had withdrawn to dress himself for the
purpose.

‘My roses,’ he said when he came back, ‘take care of mama. She is
poorly to-day. By going home with Mr Jarndyce for a day or two, I
shall hear the larks sing and preserve my amiability. It has been tried,
you know, and would be tried again if I remained at home.’

‘That bad man!’ said the Comedy daughter.

‘At the very time when he knew papa was lying ill by his wallflowers,
looking at the blue sky,’ Laura complained.

‘And when the smell of hay was in the air!’ said Arethusa.

It showed a want of poetry in the man,’ Mr Skimpole assented, but
with perfect good humour. Tt was coarse. There was an absence of the
finer touches of humanity in it! My daughters have taken great
offence,’ he explained to us, ‘at an honest man--’

‘Not honest, papa. Impossible!’ they all three protested.

‘At a rough kind of fellow--a sort of human hedgehog rolled up,’ said
Mr Skimpole, ‘who is a baker in this neighbourhood and from whom
we borrowed a couple of arm-chairs. We wanted a couple of arm-
chairs, and we hadn't got them, and therefore of course we looked to a
man who HAD got them, to lend them. Well! This morose person lent
them, and we wore them out. When they were worn out, he wanted
them back. He had them back. He was contented, you will say. Not at
all. He objected to their being worn. I reasoned with him, and pointed
out his mistake. I said, 'Can you, at your time of life, be so
headstrong, my friend, as to persist that an arm-chair is a thing to
put upon a shelf and look at? That it is an object to contemplate, to
survey from a distance, to consider from a point of sight? Don't you
KNOW that these arm-chairs were borrowed to be sat upon?’ He was
unreasonable and unpersuadable and used intemperate language.
Being as patient as I am at this minute, I addressed another appeal to
him. I said, 'Now, my good man, however our business capacities may
vary, we are all children of one great mother, Nature. On this
blooming summer morning here you see me' (I was on the sofa) 'with
flowers before me, fruit upon the table, the cloudless sky above me,
the air full of fragrance, contemplating Nature. I entreat you, by our
common brotherhood, not to interpose between me and a subject so
sublime, the absurd figure of an angry baker!’ But he did,’ said Mr
Skimpole, raising his laughing eyes in playful astonishment; ‘he did
interpose that ridiculous figure, and he does, and he will again. And
therefore I am very glad to get out of his way and to go home with my
friend Jarndyce.’

It seemed to escape his consideration that Mrs Skimpole and the
daughters remained behind to encounter the baker, but this was so
old a story to all of them that it had become a matter of course. He
took leave of his family with a tenderness as airy and graceful as any
other aspect in which he showed himself and rode away with us in
perfect harmony of mind. We had an opportunity of seeing through
some open doors, as we went downstairs, that his own apartment was
a palace to the rest of the house.

I could have no anticipation, and I had none, that something very
startling to me at the moment, and ever memorable to me in what
ensued from it, was to happen before this day was out. Our guest was
in such spirits on the way home that I could do nothing but listen to
him and wonder at him; nor was I alone in this, for Ada yielded to the
same fascination. As to my guardian, the wind, which had threatened
to become fixed in the east when we left Somers Town, veered
completely round before we were a couple of miles from it.

Whether of questionable childishness or not in any other matters, Mr
Skimpole had a child's enjoyment of change and bright weather. In no
way wearied by his sallies on the road, he was in the drawing-room
before any of us; and I heard him at the piano while I was yet looking
after my housekeeping, singing refrains of barcaroles and drinking
songs, Italian and German, by the score.

We were all assembled shortly before dinner, and he was still at the
piano idly picking out in his luxurious way little strains of music, and
talking between whiles of finishing some sketches of the ruined old
Verulam wall to-morrow, which he had begun a year or two ago and
had got tired of, when a card was brought in and my guardian read
aloud in a surprised voice, ‘Sir Leicester Dedlock!’

The visitor was in the room while it was yet turning round with me
and before I had the power to stir. If I had had it, I should have
hurried away. I had not even the presence of mind, in my giddiness, to
retire to Ada in the window, or to see the window, or to know where it
was. I heard my name and found that my guardian was presenting me
before I could move to a chair.

‘Pray be seated, Sir Leicester.’

‘Mr Jarndyce,’ said Sir Leicester in reply as he bowed and seated
himself, ‘I do myself the honour of calling here--’

‘You do ME the honour, Sir Leicester.’

‘Thank you--of calling here on my road from Lincolnshire to express
my regret that any cause of complaint, however strong, that I may
have against a gentleman who--who is known to you and has been
your host, and to whom therefore I will make no farther reference,
should have prevented you, still more ladies under your escort and
charge, from seeing whatever little there may be to gratify a polite and
refined taste at my house, Chesney Wold.’

‘YYou are exceedingly obliging, Sir Leicester, and on behalf of those
ladies (who are present) and for myself, I thank you very much.’

Tt is possible, Mr Jarndyce, that the gentleman to whom, for the
reasons I have mentioned, I refrain from making further allusion-- it is
possible, Mr Jarndyce, that that gentleman may have done me the
honour so far to misapprehend my character as to induce you to
believe that you would not have been received by my local
establishment in Lincolnshire with that urbanity, that courtesy, which
its members are instructed to show to all ladies and gentlemen who
present themselves at that house. I merely beg to observe, sir, that the
fact is the reverse.’

My guardian delicately dismissed this remark without making any
verbal answer.
Tt has given me pain, Mr Jarndyce,’ Sir Leicester weightily proceeded.
IT assure you, sir, it has given--me--pain--to learn from the
housekeeper at Chesney Wold that a gentleman who was in your
company in that part of the county, and who would appear to possess
a cultivated taste for the fine arts, was likewise deterred by some such
cause from examining the family pictures with that leisure, that
attention, that care, which he might have desired to bestow upon
them and which some of them might possibly have repaid.’ Here he
produced a card and read, with much gravity and a little trouble,
through his eye-glass, ‘Mr Hirrold--Herald-- Harold--Skampling--
Skumpling--I beg your pardon--Skimpole.’

‘This is Mr Harold Skimpole,’ said my guardian, evidently surprised.

‘Oh!’ exclaimed Sir Leicester, I am happy to meet Mr Skimpole and to
have the opportunity of tendering my personal regrets. I hope, sir, that
when you again find yourself in my part of the county, you will be
under no similar sense of restraint.’

‘You are very obliging, Sir Leicester Dedlock. So encouraged, I shall
certainly give myself the pleasure and advantage of another visit to
your beautiful house. The owners of such places as Chesney Wold,’
said Mr Skimpole with his usual happy and easy air, ‘are public
benefactors. They are good enough to maintain a number of delightful
objects for the admiration and pleasure of us poor men; and not to
reap all the admiration and pleasure that they yield is to be ungrateful
to our benefactors.’

Sir Leicester seemed to approve of this sentiment highly. ‘An artist,
sir?’

‘No,’ returned Mr Skimpole. ‘A perfectly idle man. A mere amateur.’

Sir Leicester seemed to approve of this even more. He hoped he might
have the good fortune to be at Chesney Wold when Mr Skimpole next
came down into Lincolnshire. Mr Skimpole professed himself much
flattered and honoured.

‘Mr Skimpole mentioned,’ pursued Sir Leicester, addressing himself
again to my guardian, ‘mentioned to the housekeeper, who, as he may
have observed, is an old and attached retainer of the family--’

(That is, when I walked through the house the other day, on the
occasion of my going down to visit Miss Summerson and Miss Clare,’
Mr Skimpole airily explained to us.)

‘--That the friend with whom he had formerly been staying there was
Mr Jarndyce.’ Sir Leicester bowed to the bearer of that name. ‘And
hence I became aware of the circumstance for which I have professed
my regret. That this should have occurred to any gentleman, Mr
Jarndyce, but especially a gentleman formerly known to Lady
Dedlock, and indeed claiming some distant connexion with her, and
for whom (as I learn from my Lady herself) she entertains a high
respect, does, I assure you, give--me--pain.’

‘Pray say no more about it, Sir Leicester,’ returned my guardian. I am
very sensible, as I am sure we all are, of your consideration. Indeed
the mistake was mine, and I ought to apologize for it.’

I had not once looked up. I had not seen the visitor and had not even
appeared to myself to hear the conversation. It surprises me to find
that I can recall it, for it seemed to make no impression on me as it
passed. I heard them speaking, but my mind was so confused and my
instinctive avoidance of this gentleman made his presence so
distressing to me that I thought I understood nothing, through the
rushing in my head and the beating of my heart.

IT mentioned the subject to Lady Dedlock,’ said Sir Leicester, rising,
‘and my Lady informed me that she had had the pleasure of
exchanging a few words with Mr Jarndyce and his wards on the
occasion of an accidental meeting during their sojourn in the vicinity.
Permit me, Mr Jarndyce, to repeat to yourself, and to these ladies, the
assurance I have already tendered to Mr Skimpole. Circumstances
undoubtedly prevent my saying that it would afford me any
gratification to hear that Mr Boythorn had favoured my house with his
presence, but those circumstances are confined to that gentleman
himself and do not extend beyond him.’

‘You know my old opinion of him,’ said Mr Skimpole, lightly appealing
to us. ‘An amiable bull who is determined to make every colour
scarlet!’

Sir Leicester Dedlock coughed as if he could not possibly hear another
word in reference to such an individual and took his leave with great
ceremony and politeness. I got to my own room with all possible speed
and remained there until I had recovered my self- command. It had
been very much disturbed, but I was thankful to find when I went
downstairs again that they only rallied me for having been shy and
mute before the great Lincolnshire baronet.

By that time I had made up my mind that the period was come when I
must tell my guardian what I knew. The possibility of my being
brought into contact with my mother, of my being taken to her house,
even of Mr Skimpole's, however distantly associated with me, receiving
kindnesses and obligations from her husband, was so painful that I
felt I could no longer guide myself without his assistance.
When we had retired for the night, and Ada and I had had our usual
talk in our pretty room, I went out at my door again and sought my
guardian among his books. I knew he always read at that hour, and
as I drew near I saw the light shining out into the passage from his
reading-lamp.

‘May I come in, guardian?’
‘Surely, little woman. What's the matter?’

‘Nothing is the matter. I thought I would like to take this quiet time of
saying a word to you about myself.’

He put a chair for me, shut his book, and put it by, and turned his
kind attentive face towards me. I could not help observing that it wore
that curious expression I had observed in it once before--on that night
when he had said that he was in no trouble which I could readily
understand.

‘What concerns you, my dear Esther,’ said he, ‘concerns us all. You
cannot be more ready to speak than I am to hear.’

T know that, guardian. But I have such need of your advice and
support. Oh! You don't know how much need I have to-night.’

He looked unprepared for my being so earnest, and even a little
alarmed.

‘Or how anxious I have been to speak to you,’ said I, ‘ever since the
visitor was here to-day.’

‘The visitor, my dear! Sir Leicester Dedlock?’

‘Yes.’

He folded his arms and sat looking at me with an air of the
profoundest astonishment, awaiting what I should say next. I did not
know how to prepare him.

‘Why, Esther,’ said he, breaking into a smile, ‘our visitor and you are
the two last persons on earth I should have thought of connecting
together!’

‘Oh, yes, guardian, I know it. And I too, but a little while ago.’

The smile passed from his face, and he became graver than before. He

crossed to the door to see that it was shut (but I had seen to that) and
resumed his seat before me.
‘Guardian,’ said I, ‘do you remensher, when we were overtaken by the
thunder-storm, Lady Dedlock's speaking to you of her sister?’

‘Of course. Of course I do.’

‘And reminding you that she and her sister had differed, had gone
their several ways?’

‘Of course.’
‘Why did they separate, guardian?’

His face quite altered as he looked at me. ‘My child, what questions
are these! I never knew. No one but themselves ever did know, I
believe. Who could tell what the secrets of those two handsome and
proud women were! You have seen Lady Dedlock. If you had ever seen
her sister, you would know her to have been as resolute and haughty
as she.’

‘Oh, guardian, I have seen her many and many a time!’
‘Seen her?’

He paused a little, biting his lip. Then, Esther, when you spoke to me
long ago of Boythorn, and when I told you that he was all but married
once, and that the lady did not die, but died to him, and that that
time had had its influence on his later life--did you know it all, and
know who the lady was?’

‘No, guardian,’ I returned, fearful of the light that dimly broke upon
me. ‘Nor do I know yet.’

‘Lady Dedlock's sister.’

‘And why,’ I could scarcely ask him, ‘why, guardian, pray tell me why
were THEY parted?’

Tt was her act, and she kept its motives in her inflexible heart. He
afterwards did conjecture (but it was mere conjecture) that some
injury which her haughty spirit had received in her cause of quarrel
with her sister had wounded her beyond all reason, but she wrote him
that from the date of that letter she died to him--as in literal truth she
did--and that the resolution was exacted from her by her knowledge of
his proud temper and his strained sense of honour, which were both
her nature too. In consideration for those master points in him, and
even in consideration for them in herself, she made the sacrifice, she
said, and would live in it and die in it. She did both, I fear; certainly
he never saw her, never heard of her from that hour. Nor did any one.’
‘Oh, guardian, what have I done!’ I cried, giving way to my grief; ‘what
sorrow have I innocently caused!’

‘You caused, Esther?’

‘Yes, guardian. Innocently, but most surely. That secluded sister is my
first remembrance.’

‘No, no!’ he cried, starting.
‘Yes, guardian, yes! And HER sister is my mother!’

I would have told him all my mother's letter, but he would not hear it
then. He spoke so tenderly and wisely to me, and he put so plainly
before me all I had myself imperfectly thought and hoped in my better
state of mind, that, penetrated as I had been with fervent gratitude
towards him through so many years, I believed I had never loved him
so dearly, never thanked him in my heart so fully, as I did that night.
And when he had taken me to my room and kissed me at the door,
and when at last I lay down to sleep, my thought was how could I ever
be busy enough, how could I ever be good enough, how in my little
way could I ever hope to be forgetful enough of myself, devoted enough
to him, and useful enough to others, to show him how I blessed and
honoured him.
CHAPTER XLIV - The Letter and the Answer

My guardian called me into his room next morning, and then I told
him what had been left untold on the previous night. There was
nothing to be done, he said, but to keep the secret and to avoid
another such encounter as that of yesterday. He understood my
feeling and entirely shared it. He charged himself even with
restraining Mr Skimpole from improving his opportunity. One person
whom he need not name to me, it was not now possible for him to
advise or help. He wished it were, but no such thing could be. If her
mistrust of the lawyer whom she had mentioned were well- founded,
which he scarcely doubted, he dreaded discovery. He knew something
of him, both by sight and by reputation, and it was certain that he
was a dangerous man. Whatever happened, he repeatedly impressed
upon me with anxious affection and kindness, I was as innocent of as
himself and as unable to influence.

‘Nor do I understand,’ said he, ‘that any doubts tend towards you, my
dear. Much suspicion may exist without that connexion.’

‘With the lawyer,’ I returned. ‘But two other persons have come into
my mind since I have been anxious.’ Then I told him all about Mr
Guppy, who I feared might have had his vague surmises when I little
understood his meaning, but in whose silence after our last interview I
expressed perfect confidence.

‘Well,’ said my guardian. ‘Then we may dismiss him for the present.
Who is the other?’

I called to his recollection the French maid and the eager offer of
herself she had made to me.

‘Ha!’ he returned thoughtfully. ‘That is a more alarming person than
the clerk. But after all, my dear, it was but seeking for a new service.
She had seen you and Ada a little while before, and it was natural that
you should come into her head. She merely proposed herself for your
maid, you know. She did nothing more.’

‘Her manner was strange,’ said I.

‘Yes, and her manner was strange when she took her shoes off and
showed that cool relish for a walk that might have ended in her death-
bed,’ said my guardian. Tt would be useless self-distress and torment
to reckon up such chances and possibilities. There are very few
harmless circumstances that would not seem full of perilous meaning,
so considered. Be hopeful, littl woman. You can be nothing better
than yourself; be that, through this knowledge, as you were before you
had it. It is the best you can do for everybody's sake. I, sharing the
secret with you--’

‘And lightening it, guardian, so much,’ said I.

‘“--will be attentive to what passes in that family, so far as I can
observe it from my distance. And if the time should come when I can
stretch out a hand to render the least service to one whom it is better
not to name even here, I will not fail to do it for her dear daughter's
sake.’

I thanked him with my whole heart. What could I ever do but thank
him! I was going out at the door when he asked me to stay a moment.
Quickly turning round, I saw that same expression on his face again;
and all at once, I don't know how, it flashed upon me as a new and
far-off possibility that I understood it.

‘My dear Esther,’ said my guardian, T have long had something in my
thoughts that I have wished to say to you.’

Indeed?’

T have had some difficulty in approaching it, and I still have. I should
wish it to be so deliberately said, and so deliberately considered.
Would you object to my writing it?’

‘Dear guardian, how could I object to your writing anything for ME to
read?’

Then see, my love,’ said he with his cheery smile, ‘am I at this
moment quite as plain and easy--do I seem as open, as honest and
old-fashioned--as I am at any time?’

I answered in all earnestness, ‘Quite.’ With the strictest truth, for his
momentary hesitation was gone (it had not lasted a minute), and his
fine, sensible, cordial, sterling manner was restored.

‘Do I look as if I suppressed anything, meant anything but what I said,
had any reservation at all, no matter what?’ said he with his bright
clear eyes on mine.

I answered, most assuredly he did not.

‘Can you fully trust me, and thoroughly rely on what I profess,
Esther?’

‘Most thoroughly,’ said I with my whole heart.
‘My dear girl,’ returned my guardian, ‘give me your hand.’

He took it in his, holding me lightly with his arm, and looking down
into my face with the same genuine freshness and faithfulness of
manner--the old protecting manner which had made that house my
home in a moment--said, ‘You have wrought changes in me, little
woman, since the winter day in the stage-coach. First and last you
have done me a world of good since that time.’

‘Ah, guardian, what have you done for me since that time!’
‘But,’ said he, ‘that is not to be remembered now.’
Tt never can be forgotten.’

‘Yes, Esther,’ said he with a gentle seriousness, ‘it is to be forgotten
now, to be forgotten for a while. You are only to remember now that
nothing can change me as you know me. Can you feel quite assured of
that, my dear?’

T can, and I do,’ I said.

‘That's much,’ he answered. That's everything. But I must not take
that at a word. I will not write this something in my thoughts until
you have quite resolved within yourself that nothing can change me as
you know me. If you doubt that in the least degree, I will never write
it. If you are sure of that, on good consideration, send Charley to me
this night week--'for the letter.’ But if you are not quite certain, never
send. Mind, I trust to your truth, in this thing as in everything. If you
are not quite certain on that one point, never send!’

‘Guardian,’ said I, I am already certain, I can no more be changed in
that conviction than you can be changed towards me. I shall send
Charley for the letter.’

He shook my hand and said no more. Nor was any more said in
reference to this conversation, either by him or me, through the whole
week. When the appointed night came, I said to Charley as soon as I
was alone, ‘Go and knock at Mr Jarndyce's door, Charley, and say you
have come from me--'for the letter.'‘ Charley went up the stairs, and
down the stairs, and along the passages--the zig- zag way about the
old-fashioned house seemed very long in my listening ears that night--
and so came back, along the passages, and down the stairs, and up
the stairs, and brought the letter. ‘Lay it on the table, Charley,’ said I.
So Charley laid it on the table and went to bed, and I sat looking at it
without taking it up, thinking of many things.
I began with my overshadowed childhood, and passed through those
timid days to the heavy time when my aunt lay dead, with her resolute
face so cold and set, and when I was more solitary with Mrs Rachael
than if I had had no one in the world to speak to or to look at. I
passed to the altered days when I was so blest as to find friends in all
around me, and to be beloved. I came to the time when I first saw my
dear girl and was received into that sisterly affection which was the
grace and beauty of my life. I recalled the first bright gleam of welcome
which had shone out of those very windows upon our expectant faces
on that cold bright night, and which had never paled. I lived my happy
life there over again, I went through my illness and recovery, I thought
of myself so altered and of those around me so unchanged; and all
this happiness shone like a light from one central figure, represented
before me by the letter on the table.

I opened it and read it. It was so impressive in its love for me, and in
the unselfish caution it gave me, and the consideration it showed for
me in every word, that my eyes were too often blinded to read much at
a time. But I read it through three times before I laid it down. I had
thought beforehand that I knew its purport, and I did. It asked me,
would I be the mistress of Bleak House.

It was not a love letter, though it expressed so much love, but was
written just as he would at any time have spoken to me. I saw his
face, and heard his voice, and felt the influence of his kind protecting
manner in every line. It addressed me as if our places were reversed,
as if all the good deeds had been mine and all the feelings they had
awakened his. It dwelt on my being young, and he past the prime of
life; on his having attained a ripe age, while I was a child; on his
writing to me with a silvered head, and knowing all this so well as to
set it in full before me for mature deliberation. It told me that I would
gain nothing by such a marriage and lose nothing by rejecting it, for
no new relation could enhance the tenderness in which he held me,
and whatever my decision was, he was certain it would be right. But
he had considered this step anew since our late confidence and had
decided on taking it, if it only served to show me through one poor
instance that the whole world would readily unite to falsify the stern
prediction of my childhood. I was the last to know what happiness I
could bestow upon him, but of that he said no more, for I was always
to remember that I owed him nothing and that he was my debtor, and
for very much. He had often thought of our future, and foreseeing that
the time must come, and fearing that it might come soon, when Ada
(now very nearly of age) would leave us, and when our present mode of
life must be broken up, had become accustomed to reflect on this
proposal. Thus he made it. If I felt that I could ever give him the best
right he could have to be my protector, and if I felt that I could happily
and justly become the dear companion of his remaining life, superior
to all lighter chances and changes than death, even then he could not
have me bind myself irrevocably while this letter was yet so new to
me, but even then I must have ample time for reconsideration. In that
case, or in the opposite case, let him be unchanged in his old relation,
in his old manner, in the old name by which I called him. And as to
his bright Dame Durden and little housekeeper, she would ever be the
same, he knew.

This was the substance of the letter, written throughout with a justice
and a dignity as if he were indeed my responsible guardian impartially
representing the proposal of a friend against whom in his integrity he
stated the full case.

But he did not hint to me that when I had been better looking he had
had this same proceeding in his thoughts and had refrained from it.
That when my old face was gone from me, and I had no attractions, he
could love me just as well as in my fairer days. That the discovery of
my birth gave him no shock. That his generosity rose above my
disfigurement and my inheritance of shame. That the more I stood in
need of such fidelity, the more firmly I might trust in him to the last.

But I knew it, I knew it well now. It came upon me as the close of the
benignant history I had been pursuing, and I felt that I had but one
thing to do. To devote my life to his happiness was to thank him
poorly, and what had I wished for the other night but some new
means of thanking him?

Still I cried very much, not only in the fullness of my heart after
reading the letter, not only in the strangeness of the prospect-- for it
was strange though I had expected the contents--but as if something
for which there was no name or distinct idea were indefinitely lost to
me. I was very happy, very thankful, very hopeful; but I cried very
much.

By and by I went to my old glass. My eyes were red and swollen, and I
said, ‘Oh, Esther, Esther, can that be you!’ I am afraid the face in the
glass was going to cry again at this reproach, but I held up my finger
at it, and it stopped.

‘That is more like the composed look you comforted me with, my dear,
when you showed me such a change!’ said I, beginning to let down my
hair. ‘When you are mistress of Bleak House, you are to be as cheerful
as a bird. In fact, you are always to be cheerful; so let us begin for
once and for all.’

I went on with my hair now, quite comfortably. I sobbed a little still,
but that was because I had been crying, not because I was crying
then.
‘And so Esther, my dear, you are happy for life. Happy with your best
friends, happy in your old home, happy in the power of doing a great
deal of good, and happy in the undeserved love of the best of men.’

I thought, all at once, if my guardian had married some one else, how
should I have felt, and what should I have done! That would have
been a change indeed. It presented my life in such a new and blank
form that I rang my housekeeping keys and gave them a kiss before I
laid them down in their basket again.

Then I went on to think, as I dressed my hair before the glass, how
often had I considered within myself that the deep traces of my illness
and the circumstances of my birth were only new reasons why I
should be busy, busy, busy--useful, amiable, serviceable, in all
honest, unpretending ways. This was a good time, to be sure, to sit
down morbidly and cry! As to its seeming at all strange to me at first
(if that were any excuse for crying, which it was not) that I was one
day to be the mistress of Bleak House, why should it seem strange?
Other people had thought of such things, if I had not. ‘Don't you
remember, my plain dear,’ I asked myself, looking at the glass, ‘what
Mrs Woodcourt said before those scars were there about your
marrying--’

Perhaps the name brought them to my remembrance. The dried
remains of the flowers. It would be better not to keep them now. They
had only been preserved in memory of something wholly past and
gone, but it would be better not to keep them now.

They were in a book, and it happened to be in the next room--our
sitting-room, dividing Ada's chamber from mine. I took a candle and
went softly in to fetch it from its shelf. After I had it in my hand, I saw
my beautiful darling, through the open door, lying asleep, and I stole
in to kiss her.

It was weak in me, I know, and I could have no reason for crying; but I
dropped a tear upon her dear face, and another, and another. Weaker
than that, I took the withered flowers out and put them for a moment
to her lips. I thought about her love for Richard, though, indeed, the
flowers had nothing to do with that. Then I took them into my own
room and burned them at the candle, and they were dust in an
instant.

On entering the breakfast-room next morning, I found my guardian
just as usual, quite as frank, as open, and free. There being not the
least constraint in his manner, there was none (or I think there was
none) in mine. I was with him several times in the course of the
morning, in and out, when there was no one there, and I thought it
not unlikely that he might speak to me about the letter, but he did not
say a word.

So, on the next morning, and the next, and for at least a week, over
which time Mr Skimpole prolonged his stay. I expected, every day,
that my guardian might speak to me about the letter, but he never
did.

I thought then, growing uneasy, that I ought to write an answer. I
tried over and over again in my own room at night, but I could not
write an answer that at all began like a good answer, so I thought
each night I would wait one more day. And I waited seven more days,
and he never said a word.

At last, Mr Skimpole having departed, we three were one afternoon
going out for a ride; and I, being dressed before Ada and going down,
came upon my guardian, with his back towards me, standing at the
drawing-room window looking out.

He turned on my coming in and said, smiling, ‘Aye, it's you, little
woman, is it?’ and looked out again.

I had made up my mind to speak to him now. In short, I had come
down on purpose. ‘Guardian,’ I said, rather hesitating and trembling,
‘when would you like to have the answer to the letter Charley came
for?’

‘When it's ready, my dear,’ he replied.

T think it is ready,’ said I.

Is Charley to bring it?’ he asked pleasantly.

‘No. I have brought it myself, guardian,’ I returned.

I put my two arms round his neck and kissed him, and he said was
this the mistress of Bleak House, and I said yes; and it made no

difference presently, and we all went out together, and I said nothing
to my precious pet about it.
CHAPTER XLV - In Trust

One morning when I had done jingling about with my baskets of keys,
as my beauty and I were walking round and round the garden I
happened to turn my eyes towards the house and saw a long thin
shadow going in which looked like Mr Vholes. Ada had been telling me
only that morning of her hopes that Richard might exhaust his ardour
in the Chancery suit by being so very earnest in it; and therefore, not
to damp my dear girl's spirits, I said nothing about Mr Vholes's
shadow.

Presently came Charley, lightly winding among the bushes and
tripping along the paths, as rosy and pretty as one of Flora's
attendants instead of my maid, saying, ‘Oh, if you please, miss, would
you step and speak to Mr Jarndyce!’

It was one of Charley's peculiarities that whenever she was charged
with a message she always began to deliver it as soon as she beheld,
at any distance, the person for whom it was intended. Therefore I saw
Charley asking me in her usual form of words to ‘step and speak’ to
Mr Jarndyce long before I heard her. And when I did hear her, she
had said it so often that she was out of breath.

I told Ada I would make haste back and inquired of Charley as we
went in whether there was not a gentleman with Mr Jarndyce. To
which Charley, whose grammar, I confess to my shame, never did any
credit to my educational powers, replied, ‘Yes, miss. Him as come
down in the country with Mr Richard.’

A more complete contrast than my guardian and Mr Vholes I suppose
there could not be. I found them looking at one another across a table,
the one so open and the other so close, the one so broad and upright
and the other so narrow and stooping, the one giving out what he had
to say in such a rich ringing voice and the other keeping it in in such
a cold-blooded, gasping, fish-like manner that I thought I never had
seen two people so unmatched.

‘YYou know Mr Vholes, my dear,’ said my guardian. Not with the
greatest urbanity, I must say.

Mr Vholes rose, gloved and buttoned up as usual, and seated himself
again, just as he had seated himself beside Richard in the gig. Not
having Richard to look at, he looked straight before him.

‘Mr Vholes,’ said my guardian, eyeing his black figure as if he were a
bird of ill omen, ‘has brought an ugly report of our most unfortunate
Rick.’ Laying a marked emphasis on ‘most unfortunate’ as if the words
were rather descriptive of his connexion with Mr Vholes.
I sat down between them; Mr Vholes remained immovable, except that
he secretly picked at one of the red pimples on his yellow face with his
black glove.

‘And as Rick and you are happily good friends, I should like to know,’
said my guardian, ‘what you think, my dear. Would you be so good as
to--as to speak up, Mr Vholes?’

Doing anything but that, Mr Vholes observed, ‘I have been saying that
I have reason to know, Miss Summerson, as Mr C.'s professional
adviser, that Mr C.'s circumstances are at the present moment in an
embarrassed state. Not so much in point of amount as owing to the
peculiar and pressing nature of liabilities Mr C. has incurred and the
means he has of liquidating or meeting the same. I have staved off
many little matters for Mr C., but there is a limit to staving off, and we
have reached it. I have made some advances out of pocket to
accommodate these unpleasantnesses, but I necessarily look to being
repaid, for I do not pretend to be a man of capital, and I have a father
to support in the Vale of Taunton, besides striving to realize some
little independence for three dear girls at home. My apprehension is,
Mr C.'s circumstances being such, lest it should end in his obtaining
leave to part with his commission, which at all events is desirable to
be made known to his connexions.’

Mr Vholes, who had looked at me while speaking, here emerged into
the silence he could hardly be said to have broken, so stifled was his
tone, and looked before him again.

Imagine the poor fellow without even his present resource,’ said my
guardian to me. ‘Yet what can I do? You know him, Esther. He would
never accept of help from me now. To offer it or hint at it would be to
drive him to an extremity, if nothing else did.’

Mr Vholes hereupon addressed me again.

‘What Mr Jarndyce remarks, miss, is no doubt the case, and is the
difficulty. I do not see that anything is to be done, I do not say that
anything is to be done. Far from it. I merely come down here under
the seal of confidence and mention it in order that everything may be
openly carried on and that it may not be said afterwards that
everything was not openly carried on. My wish is that everything
should be openly carried on. I desire to leave a good name behind me.
If I consulted merely my own interests with Mr C., I should not be
here. So insurmountable, as you must well know, would be his
objections. This is not a professional attendance. This can he charged
to nobody. I have no interest in it except as a member of society and a
father--AND a son,’ said Mr Vholes, who had nearly forgotten that
point.
It appeared to us that Mr Vholes said neither more nor less than the
truth in intimating that he sought to divide the responsibility, such as
it was, of knowing Richard's situation. I could only suggest that I
should go down to Deal, where Richard was then stationed, and see
him, and try if it were possible to avert the worst. Without consulting
Mr Vholes on this point, I took my guardian aside to propose it, while
Mr Vholes gauntly stalked to the fire and warmed his funeral gloves.

The fatigue of the journey formed an immediate objection on my
guardian's part, but as I saw he had no other, and as I was only too
happy to go, I got his consent. We had then merely to dispose of Mr
Vholes.

‘Well, sir,’ said Mr Jarndyce, ‘Miss Summerson will communicate with
Mr Carstone, and you can only hope that his position may be yet
retrievable. You will allow me to order you lunch after your journey,
sir.’

T thank you, Mr Jarndyce,’ said Mr Vholes, putting out his long black
sleeve to check the ringing of the bell, ‘not any. I thank you, no, nota
morsel. My digestion is much impaired, and I am but a poor knife and
fork at any time. If I was to partake of solid food at this period of the
day, I don't know what the consequences might be. Everything having
been openly carried on, sir, I will now with your permission take my
leave.’

‘And I would that you could take your leave, and we could all take our
leave, Mr Vholes,’ returned my guardian bitterly, ‘of a cause you know
of.’

Mr Vholes, whose black dye was so deep from head to foot that it had
quite steamed before the fire, diffusing a very unpleasant perfume,
made a short one-sided inclination of his head from the neck and
slowly shook it.

‘We whose ambition it is to be looked upon in the light of respectable
practitioners, sir, can but put our shoulders to the wheel. We do it,
sir. At least, I do it myself; and I wish to think well of my professional
brethren, one and all. You are sensible of an obligation not to refer to
me, miss, in communicating with Mr C.?’

I said I would be careful not to do it.

Just so, miss. Good morning. Mr Jarndyce, good morning, sir.’ Mr
Vholes put his dead glove, which scarcely seemed to have any hand in
it, on my fingers, and then on my guardian's fingers, and took his long
thin shadow away. I thought of it on the outside of the coach, passing
over all the sunny landscape between us and London, chilling the
seed in the ground as it glided along.

Of course it became necessary to tell Ada where I was going and why I
was going, and of course she was anxious and distressed. But she was
too true to Richard to say anything but words of pity and words of
excuse, and in a more loving spirit still--my dear devoted girl!--she
wrote him a long letter, of which I took charge.

Charley was to be my travelling companion, though I am sure I
wanted none and would willingly have left her at home. We all went to
London that afternoon, and finding two places in the mail, secured
them. At our usual bed-time, Charley and I were rolling away seaward
with the Kentish letters.

It was a night's journey in those coach times, but we had the mail to
ourselves and did not find the night very tedious. It passed with me as
I suppose it would with most people under such circumstances. At
one while my journey looked hopeful, and at another hopeless. Now I
thought I should do some good, and now I wondered how I could ever
have supposed so. Now it seemed one of the most reasonable things in
the world that I should have come, and now one of the most
unreasonable. In what state I should find Richard, what I should say
to him, and what he would say to me occupied my mind by turns with
these two states of feeling; and the wheels seemed to play one tune (to
which the burden of my guardian's letter set itself) over and over again
all night.

At last we came into the narrow streets of Deal, and very gloomy they
were upon a raw misty morning. The long flat beach, with its little
irregular houses, wooden and brick, and its litter of capstans, and
great boats, and sheds, and bare upright poles with tackle and blocks,
and loose gravelly waste places overgrown with grass and weeds, wore
as dull an appearance as any place I ever saw. The sea was heaving
under a thick white fog; and nothing else was moving but a few early
ropemakers, who, with the yarn twisted round their bodies, looked as
if, tired of their present state of existence, they were spinning
themselves into cordage.

But when we got into a warm room in an excellent hotel and sat down,
comfortably washed and dressed, to an early breakfast (for it was too
late to think of going to bed), Deal began to look more cheerful. Our
little room was like a ship's cabin, and that delighted Charley very
much. Then the fog began to rise like a curtain, and numbers of ships
that we had had no idea were near appeared. I don't know how many
sail the waiter told us were then lying in the downs. Some of these
vessels were of grand size--one was a large Indiaman just come home;
and when the sun shone through the clouds, making silvery pools in
the dark sea, the way in which these ships brightened, and shadowed,
and changed, amid a bustle of boats pulling off from the shore to them
and from them to the shore, and a general life and motion in
themselves and everything around them, was most beautiful.

The large Indiaman was our great attraction because she had come
into the downs in the night. She was surrounded by boats, and we
said how glad the people on board of her must be to come ashore.
Charley was curious, too, about the voyage, and about the heat in
India, and the serpents and the tigers; and as she picked up such
information much faster than grammar, I told her what I knew on
those points. I told her, too, how people in such voyages were
sometimes wrecked and cast on rocks, where they were saved by the
intrepidity and humanity of one man. And Charley asking how that
could be, I told her how we knew at home of such a case.

I had thought of sending Richard a note saying I was there, but it
seemed so much better to go to him without preparation. As he lived
in barracks I was a little doubtful whether this was feasible, but we
went out to reconnoitre. Peeping in at the gate of the barrack-yard, we
found everything very quiet at that time in the morning, and I asked a
sergeant standing on the guardhouse- steps where he lived. He sent a
man before to show me, who went up some bare stairs, and knocked
with his knuckles at a door, and left us.

‘Now then!’ cried Richard from within. So I left Charley in the little
passage, and going on to the half-open door, said, ‘Can I come in,
Richard? It's only Dame Durden.’

He was writing at a table, with a great confusion of clothes, tin cases,
books, boots, brushes, and portmanteaus strewn all about the floor.
He was only half dressed--in plain clothes, I observed, not in uniform-
-and his hair was unbrushed, and he looked as wild as his room. All
this I saw after he had heartily welcomed me and I was seated near
him, for he started upon hearing my voice and caught me in his arms
in a moment. Dear Richard! He was ever the same to me. Down to--
ah, poor poor fellow!--to the end, he never received me but with
something of his old merry boyish manner.

‘Good heaven, my dear little woman,’ said he, ‘how do you come here?
Who could have thought of seeing you! Nothing the matter? Ada is
well?’

‘Quite well. Lovelier than ever, Richard!’

‘Ah!’ he said, leaning back in his chair. ‘My poor cousin! I was writing
to you, Esther.’
So worn and haggard as he looked, even in the fullness of his
handsome youth, leaning back in his chair and crushing the closely
written sheet of paper in his hand!

‘Have you been at the trouble of writing all that, and am I not to read
it after all?’ I asked.

‘Oh, my dear,’ he returned with a hopeless gesture. ‘You may read it in
the whole room. It is all over here.’

I mildly entreated him not to be despondent. I told him that I had
heard by chance of his being in difficulty and had come to consult
with him what could best be done.

‘Like you, Esther, but useless, and so NOT like you!’ said he with a
melancholy smile. I am away on leave this day--should have been
gone in another hour--and that is to smooth it over, for my selling out.
Well! Let bygones be bygones. So this calling follows the rest. I only
want to have been in the church to have made the round of all the
professions.’

‘Richard,’ I urged, ‘it is not so hopeless as that?’

‘Esther,’ he returned, ‘it is indeed. I am just so near disgrace as that
those who are put in authority over me (as the catechism goes) would
far rather be without me than with me. And they are right. Apart from
debts and duns and all such drawbacks, I am not fit even for this
employment. I have no care, no mind, no heart, no soul, but for one
thing. Why, if this bubble hadn't broken now,’ he said, tearing the
letter he had written into fragments and moodily casting them away,
by driblets, ‘how could I have gone abroad? I must have been ordered
abroad, but how could I have gone? How could I, with my experience
of that thing, trust even Vholes unless I was at his back!’

I suppose he knew by my face what I was about to say, but he caught
the hand I had laid upon his arm and touched my own lips with it to
prevent me from going on.

‘No, Dame Durden! Two subjects I forbid--must forbid. The first is
John Jarndyce. The second, you know what. Call it madness, and I
tell you I can't help it now, and can't be sane. But it is no such thing;
it is the one object I have to pursue. It is a pity I ever was prevailed
upon to turn out of my road for any other. It would be wisdom to
abandon it now, after all the time, anxiety, and pains I have bestowed
upon it! Oh, yes, true wisdom. It would be very agreeable, too, to some
people; but I never will.’
He was in that mood in which I thought it best not to increase his
determination (if anything could increase it) by opposing him. I took
out Ada's letter and put it in his hand.

‘Am I to read it now?’ he asked.

As I told him yes, he laid it on the table, and resting his head upon his
hand, began. He had not read far when he rested his head upon his
two hands--to hide his face from me. In a little while he rose as if the
light were bad and went to the window. He finished reading it there,
with his back towards me, and after he had finished and had folded it
up, stood there for some minutes with the letter in his hand. When he
came back to his chair, I saw tears in his eyes.

‘Of course, Esther, you know what she says here?’ He spoke in a
softened voice and kissed the letter as he asked me.

Yes, Richard.’

‘Offers me,’ he went on, tapping his foot upon the floor, ‘the little
inheritance she is certain of so soon--just as little and as much as I
have wasted--and begs and prays me to take it, set myself right with
it, and remain in the service.’

T know your welfare to be the dearest wish of her heart,’ said I. ‘And,
oh, my dear Richard, Ada's is a noble heart.’

TI am sure it is. I--I wish I was dead!’

He went back to the window, and laying his arm across it, leaned his
head down on his arm. It greatly affected me to see him so, but I
hoped he might become more yielding, and I remained silent. My
experience was very limited; I was not at all prepared for his rousing
himself out of this emotion to a new sense of injury.

‘And this is the heart that the same John Jarndyce, who is not
otherwise to be mentioned between us, stepped in to estrange from
me,’ said he indignantly. ‘And the dear girl makes me this generous
offer from under the same John Jarndyce's roof, and with the same
John Jarndyce's gracious consent and connivance, I dare say, as a
new means of buying me off.’

‘Richard!’ I cried out, rising hastily. I will not hear you say such
shameful words!’ I was very angry with him indeed, for the first time
in my life, but it only lasted a moment. When I saw his worn young
face looking at me as if he were sorry, I put my hand on his shoulder
and said, If you please, my dear Richard, do not speak in such a tone
to me. Consider!’
He blamed himself exceedingly and told me in the most generous
manner that he had been very wrong and that he begged my pardon a
thousand times. At that I laughed, but trembled a little too, for I was
rather fluttered after being so fiery.

‘To accept this offer, my dear Esther,’ said he, sitting down beside me
and resuming our conversation, ‘--once more, pray, pray forgive me; I
am deeply grieved--to accept my dearest cousin's offer is, I need not
say, impossible. Besides, I have letters and papers that I could show
you which would convince you it is all over here. I have done with the
red coat, believe me. But it is some satisfaction, in the midst of my
troubles and perplexities, to know that I am pressing Ada's interests
in pressing my own. Vholes has his shoulder to the wheel, and he
cannot help urging it on as much for her as for me, thank God!’

His sanguine hopes were rising within him and lighting up his
features, but they made his face more sad to me than it had been
before.

‘No, no!’ cried Richard exultingly. If every farthing of Ada's little
fortune were mine, no part of it should be spent in retaining me in
what I am not fit for, can take no interest in, and am weary of. It
should be devoted to what promises a better return, and should be
used where she has a larger stake. Don't be uneasy for me! I shall now
have only one thing on my mind, and Vholes and I will work it. I shall
not be without means. Free of my commission, I shall be able to
compound with some small usurers who will hear of nothing but their
bond now--Vholes says so. I should have a balance in my favour
anyway, but that would swell it. Come, come! You shall carry a letter
to Ada from me, Esther, and you must both of you be more hopeful of
me and not believe that I am quite cast away just yet, my dear.’

I will not repeat what I said to Richard. I know it was tiresome, and
nobody is to suppose for a moment that it was at all wise. It only came
from my heart. He heard it patiently and feelingly, but I saw that on
the two subjects he had reserved it was at present hopeless to make
any representation to him. I saw too, and had experienced in this very
interview, the sense of my guardian's remark that it was even more
mischievous to use persuasion with him than to leave him as he was.

Therefore I was driven at last to asking Richard if he would mind
convincing me that it really was all over there, as he had said, and
that it was not his mere impression. He showed me without hesitation
a correspondence making it quite plain that his retirement was
arranged. I found, from what he told me, that Mr Vholes had copies of
these papers and had been in consultation with him throughout.
Beyond ascertaining this, and having been the bearer of Ada's letter,
and being (as I was going to be) Richard's companion back to London,
I had done no good by coming down. Admitting this to myself with a
reluctant heart, I said I would return to the hotel and wait until he
joined me there, so he threw a cloak over his shoulders and saw me to
the gate, and Charley and I went back along the beach.

There was a concourse of people in one spot, surrounding some naval
officers who were landing from a boat, and pressing about them with
unusual interest. I said to Charley this would be one of the great
Indiaman's boats now, and we stopped to look.

The gentlemen came slowly up from the waterside, speaking good-
humouredly to each other and to the people around and glancing
about them as if they were glad to be in England again. ‘Charley,
Charley,’ said I, ‘come away!’ And I hurried on so swiftly that my little
maid was surprised.

It was not until we were shut up in our cabin-room and I had had
time to take breath that I began to think why I had made such haste.
In one of the sunburnt faces I had recognized Mr Allan Woodcourt,
and I had been afraid of his recognizing me. I had been unwilling that
he should see my altered looks. I had been taken by surprise, and my
courage had quite failed me.

But I knew this would not do, and I now said to myself, ‘My dear,
there is no reason--there is and there can be no reason at all--why it
should be worse for you now than it ever has been. What you were
last month, you are to-day; you are no worse, you are no better. This
is not your resolution; call it up, Esther, call it up!’ I was in a great
tremble--with running--and at first was quite unable to calm myself;
but I got better, and I was very glad to know it.

The party came to the hotel. I heard them speaking on the staircase. I
was sure it was the same gentlemen because I knew their voices
again--I mean I knew Mr Woodcourt's. It would still have been a great
relief to me to have gone away without making myself known, but I
was determined not to do so. ‘No, my dear, no. No, no, no!’

I untied my bonnet and put my veil half up--I think I mean half down,
but it matters very little--and wrote on one of my cards that I
happened to be there with Mr Richard Carstone, and I sent it in to Mr
Woodcourt. He came immediately. I told him I was rejoiced to be by
chance among the first to welcome him home to England. And I saw
that he was very sorry for me.

‘You have been in shipwreck and peril since you left us, Mr
Woodcourt,’ said I, ‘but we can hardly call that a misfortune which
enabled you to be so useful and so brave. We read of it with the truest
interest. It first came to my knowledge through your old patient, poor
Miss Flite, when I was recovering from my severe illness.’

‘Ah! Little Miss Flite!’ he said. ‘She lives the same life yet?’
Just the same.’

I was so comfortable with myself now as not to mind the veil and to be
able to put it aside.

‘Her gratitude to you, Mr Woodcourt, is delightful. She is a most
affectionate creature, as I have reason to say.’

‘YYou--you have found her so?’ he returned. T--I am glad of that.’ He
was so very sorry for me that he could scarcely speak.

T assure you,’ said I, ‘that I was deeply touched by her sympathy and
pleasure at the time I have referred to.’

T was grieved to hear that you had been very ill.’
T was very ill.’
‘But you have quite recovered?’

T have quite recovered my health and my cheerfulness,’ said I. ‘You
know how good my guardian is and what a happy life we lead, and I
have everything to be thankful for and nothing in the world to desire.’

I felt as if he had greater commiseration for me than I had ever had for
myself. It inspired me with new fortitude and new calmness to find
that it was I who was under the necessity of reassuring him. I spoke
to him of his voyage out and home, and of his future plans, and of his
probable return to India. He said that was very doubtful. He had not
found himself more favoured by fortune there than here. He had gone
out a poor ship's surgeon and had come home nothing better. While
we were talking, and when I was glad to believe that I had alleviated (if
I may use such a term) the shock he had had in seeing me, Richard
came in. He had heard downstairs who was with me, and they met
with cordial pleasure.

I saw that after their first greetings were over, and when they spoke of
Richard's career, Mr Woodcourt had a perception that all was not
going well with him. He frequently glanced at his face as if there were
something in it that gave him pain, and more than once he looked
towards me as though he sought to ascertain whether I knew what the
truth was. Yet Richard was in one of his sanguine states and in good
spirits and was thoroughly pleased to see Mr Woodcourt again, whom
he had always liked.

Richard proposed that we all should go to London together; but Mr
Woodcourt, having to remain by his ship a little longer, could not join
us. He dined with us, however, at an early hour, and became so much
more like what he used to be that I was still more at peace to think I
had been able to soften his regrets. Yet his mind was not relieved of
Richard. When the coach was almost ready and Richard ran down to
look after his luggage, he spoke to me about him.

I was not sure that I had a right to lay his whole story open, but I
referred in a few words to his estrangement from Mr Jarndyce and to
his being entangled in the ill-fated Chancery suit. Mr Woodcourt
listened with interest and expressed his regret.

I saw you observe him rather closely,’
changed?’

said I, ‘Do you think him so

‘He is changed,’ he returned, shaking his head.

I felt the blood rush into my face for the first time, but it was only an
instantaneous emotion. I turned my head aside, and it was gone.

Tt is not,’ said Mr Woodcourt, ‘his being so much younger or older, or
thinner or fatter, or paler or ruddier, as there being upon his face
such a singular expression. I never saw so remarkable a look in a
young person. One cannot say that it is all anxiety or all weariness;
yet it is both, and like ungrown despair.’

‘You do not think he is ill?’ said I.
No. He looked robust in body.

That he cannot be at peace in mind, we have too much reason to
know,’ I! proceeded. ‘Mr Woodcourt, you are going to London?’

‘To-morrow or the next day.’

‘There is nothing Richard wants so much as a friend. He always liked
you. Pray see him when you get there. Pray help him sometimes with
your companionship if you can. You do not know of what service it
might be. You cannot think how Ada, and Mr Jarndyce, and even I--
how we should all thank you, Mr Woodcourt)’

‘Miss Summerson,’ he said, more moved than he had been from the
first, ‘before heaven, I will be a true friend to him! I will accept him as
a trust, and it shall be a sacred one!’
‘God bless you!’ said I, with my eyes filling fast; but I thought they
might, when it was not for myself. ‘Ada loves him--we all love him, but
Ada loves him as we cannot. I will tell her what you say. Thank you,
and God bless you, in her name!’

Richard came back as we finished exchanging these hurried words
and gave me his arm to take me to the coach.

‘Woodcourt,’ he said, unconscious with what application, ‘pray let us
meet in London!’

‘Meet?’ returned the other. I have scarcely a friend there now but you.
Where shall I find you?’

‘Why, I must get a lodging of some sort,’ said Richard, pondering. ‘Say
at Vholes's, Symond's Inn.’

‘Good! Without loss of time.’

They shook hands heartily. When I was seated in the coach and
Richard was yet standing in the street, Mr Woodcourt laid his friendly
hand on Richard's shoulder and looked at me. I understood him and
waved mine in thanks.

And in his last look as we drove away, I saw that he was very sorry for
me. I was glad to see it. I felt for my old self as the dead may feel if
they ever revisit these scenes. I was glad to be tenderly remembered,
to be gently pitied, not to be quite forgotten.
CHAPTER XLVI - Stop Him!

Darkness rests upon Tom-All-Alone's. Dilating and dilating since the
sun went down last night, it has gradually swelled until it fills every
void in the place. For a time there were some dungeon lights burning,
as the lamp of life hums in Tom-all-Alone's, heavily, heavily, in the
nauseous air, and winking--as that lamp, too, winks in Tom-all-
Alone's--at many horrible things. But they are blotted out. The moon
has eyed Tom with a dull cold stare, as admitting some puny
emulation of herself in his desert region unfit for life and blasted by
volcanic fires; but she has passed on and is gone. The blackest
nightmare in the infernal stables grazes on Tom-all-Alone's, and Tom
is fast asleep.

Much mighty speech-making there has been, both in and out of
Parliament, concerning Tom, and much wrathful disputation how Tom
shall be got right. Whether he shall be put into the main road by
constables, or by beadles, or by bell-ringing, or by force of figures, or
by correct principles of taste, or by high church, or by low church, or
by no church; whether he shall be set to splitting trusses of polemical
straws with the crooked knife of his mind or whether he shall be put
to stone-breaking instead. In the midst of which dust and noise there
is but one thing perfectly clear, to wit, that Tom only may and can, or
shall and will, be reclaimed according to somebody's theory but
nobody's practice. And in the hopeful meantime, Tom goes to perdition
head foremost in his old determined spirit.

But he has his revenge. Even the winds are his messengers, and they
serve him in these hours of darkness. There is not a drop of Tom's
corrupted blood but propagates infection and contagion somewhere. It
shall pollute, this very night, the choice stream (in which chemists on
analysis would find the genuine nobility) of a Norman house, and his
Grace shall not be able to say nay to the infamous alliance. There is
not an atom of Tom's slime, not a cubic inch of any pestilential gas in
which he lives, not one obscenity or degradation about him, not an
ignorance, not a wickedness, not a brutality of his committing, but
shall work its retribution through every order of society up to the
proudest of the proud and to the highest of the high. Verily, what with
tainting, plundering, and spoiling, Tom has his revenge.

It is a moot point whether Tom-all-Alone's be uglier by day or by night,
but on the argument that the more that is seen of it the more
shocking it must be, and that no part of it left to the imagination is at
all likely to be made so bad as the reality, day carries it. The day
begins to break now; and in truth it might be better for the national
glory even that the sun should sometimes set upon the British
dominions than that it should ever rise upon so vile a wonder as Tom.
