A brown sunburnt gentleman, who appears in some inaptitude for
sleep to be wandering abroad rather than counting the hours on a
restless pillow, strolls hitherward at this quiet time. Attracted by
curiosity, he often pauses and looks about him, up and down the
miserable by-ways. Nor is he merely curious, for in his bright dark eye
there is compassionate interest; and as he looks here and there, he
seems to understand such wretchedness and to have studied it before.

On the banks of the stagnant channel of mud which is the main street
of Tom-all-Alone's, nothing is to be seen but the crazy houses, shut up
and silent. No waking creature save himself appears except in one
direction, where he sees the solitary figure of a woman sitting on a
door-step. He walks that way. Approaching, he observes that she has
journeyed a long distance and is footsore and travel- stained. She sits
on the door-step in the manner of one who is waiting, with her elbow
on her knee and her head upon her hand. Beside her is a canvas bag,
or bundle, she has carried. She is dozing probably, for she gives no
heed to his steps as he comes toward her.

The broken footway is so narrow that when Allan Woodcourt comes to
where the woman sits, he has to turn into the road to pass her.
Looking down at her face, his eye meets hers, and he stops.

‘What is the matter?’

‘Nothing, sir.’

‘Can't you make them hear? Do you want to be let in?’

Tm waiting till they get up at another house--a lodging-house-- not
here,’ the woman patiently returns. I'm waiting here because there
will be sun here presently to warm me.’

T am afraid you are tired. I am sorry to see you sitting in the street.’
‘Thank you, sir. It don't matter.’

A habit in him of speaking to the poor and of avoiding patronage or
condescension or childishness (which is the favourite device, many
people deeming it quite a subtlety to talk to them like little spelling

books) has put him on good terms with the woman easily.

‘Let me look at your forehead,’ he says, bending down. T am a doctor.
Don't be afraid. I wouldn't hurt you for the world.’

He knows that by touching her with his skilful and accustomed hand
he can soothe her yet more readily. She makes a slight objection,
saying, ‘It's nothing’; but he has scarcely laid his fingers on the
wounded place when she lifts it up to the light.

‘Aye! A bad bruise, and the skin sadly broken. This must be very sore.’

Tt do ache a little, sir,’ returns the woman with a started tear upon
her cheek.

‘Let me try to make it more comfortable. My handkerchief won't hurt

?

you.
‘Oh, dear no, sir, I'm sure of that!’

He cleanses the injured place and dries it, and having carefully
examined it and gently pressed it with the palm of his hand, takes a
small case from his pocket, dresses it, and binds it up. While he is
thus employed, he says, after laughing at his establishing a surgery in
the street, ‘And so your husband is a brickmaker?’

‘How do you know that, sir?’ asks the woman, astonished.

‘Why, I suppose so from the colour of the clay upon your bag and on
your dress. And I know brickmakers go about working at piecework in
different places. And I am sorry to say I have known them cruel to
their wives too.’

The woman hastily lifts up her eyes as if she would deny that her
injury is referable to such a cause. But feeling the hand upon her
forehead, and seeing his busy and composed face, she quietly drops
them again.

‘Where is he now?’ asks the surgeon.

‘He got into trouble last night, sir; but he'll look for me at the lodging-
house.’

‘He will get into worse trouble if he often misuses his large and heavy
hand as he has misused it here. But you forgive him, brutal as he is,
and I say no more of him, except that I wish he deserved it. You have
no young child?’

The woman shakes her head. ‘One as I calls mine, sir, but it's Liz's.’

‘Your own is dead. I see! Poor little thing!’

By this time he has finished and is putting up his case. I suppose you
have some settled home. Is it far from here?’ he asks, good-
humouredly making light of what he has done as she gets up and
curtsys.

It's a good two or three and twenty mile from here, sir. At Saint
Albans. You know Saint Albans, sir? I thought you gave a start like, as
if you did.’

‘Yes, I know something of it. And now I will ask you a question in
return. Have you money for your lodging?’

‘Yes, sir,’ she says, ‘really and truly.’ And she shows it. He tells her, in
acknowledgment of her many subdued thanks, that she is very
welcome, gives her good day, and walks away. Tom-all- Alone's is still
asleep, and nothing is astir.

Yes, something is! As he retraces his way to the point from which he
descried the woman at a distance sitting on the step, he sees a ragged
figure coming very cautiously along, crouching close to the soiled
walls--which the wretchedest figure might as well avoid--and furtively
thrusting a hand before it. It is the figure of a youth whose face is
hollow and whose eyes have an emaciated glare. He is so intent on
getting along unseen that even the apparition of a stranger in whole
garments does not tempt him to look back. He shades his face with
his ragged elbow as he passes on the other side of the way, and goes
shrinking and creeping on with his anxious hand before him and his
shapeless clothes hanging in shreds. Clothes made for what purpose,
or of what material, it would be impossible to say. They look, in colour
and in substance, like a bundle of rank leaves of swampy growth that
rotted long ago.

Allan Woodcourt pauses to look after him and note all this, with a
shadowy belief that he has seen the boy before. He cannot recall how
or where, but there is some association in his mind with such a form.
He imagines that he must have seen it in some hospital or refuge, still,
cannot make out why it comes with any special force on his
remembrance.

He is gradually emerging from Tom-all-Alone's in the morning light,
thinking about it, when he hears running feet behind him, and
looking round, sees the boy scouring towards him at great speed,
followed by the woman.

‘Stop him, stop him!’ cries the woman, almost breathless. ‘Stop him,
sir!’

He darts across the road into the boy's path, but the boy is quicker
than he, makes a curve, ducks, dives under his hands, comes up half-
a-dozen yards beyond him, and scours away again. Still the woman
follows, crying, ‘Stop him, sir, pray stop him!’ Allan, not knowing but
that he has just robbed her of her money, follows in chase and runs
so hard that he runs the boy down a dozen times, but each time he
repeats the curve, the duck, the dive, and scours away again. To
strike at him on any of these occasions would be to fell and disable
him, but the pursuer cannot resolve to do that, and so the grimly
ridiculous pursuit continues. At last the fugitive, hard-pressed, takes
to a narrow passage and a court which has no thoroughfare. Here,
against a hoarding of decaying timber, he is brought to bay and
tumbles down, lying gasping at his pursuer, who stands and gasps at
him until the woman comes up.

‘Oh, you, Jo!’ cries the woman. ‘What? I have found you at last!’

Jo,’ repeats Allan, looking at him with attention, Uo! Stay. To be sure!
I recollect this lad some time ago being brought before the coroner.’

‘Yes, I see you once afore at the inkwhich,’ whimpers Jo. ‘What of
that? Can't you never let such an unfortnet as me alone? An't I
unfortnet enough for you yet? How unfortnet do you want me fur to
be? I've been a-chivied and a-chivied, fust by one on you and nixt by
another on you, till I'm worritted to skins and bones. The inkwhich
warn't MY fault. I done nothink. He wos wery good to me, he wos; he
wos the only one I knowed to speak to, as ever come across my
crossing. It ain't wery likely I should want him to be inkwhiched. I
only wish I wos, myself. I don't know why I don't go and make a hole
in the water, I'm sure I don't.’

He says it with such a pitiable air, and his grimy tears appear so real,
and he lies in the corner up against the hoarding so like a growth of
fungus or any unwholesome excrescence produced there in neglect
and impurity, that Allan Woodcourt is softened towards him. He says
to the woman, ‘Miserable creature, what has he done?’

To which she only replies, shaking her head at the prostrate figure
more amazedly than angrily, ‘Oh, you Jo, you Jo. I have found you at
last!’

‘What has he done?’ says Allan. ‘Has he robbed you?’

‘No, sir, no. Robbed me? He did nothing but what was kind-hearted by
me, and that's the wonder of it.’

Allan looks from Jo to the woman, and from the woman to Jo, waiting
for one of them to unravel the riddle.

‘But he was along with me, sir,’ says the woman. ‘Oh, you Jo! He was
along with me, sir, down at Saint Albans, ill, and a young lady, Lord
bless her for a good friend to me, took pity on him when I durstn't,
and took him home--’

Allan shrinks back from him with a sudden horror.

Yes, sir, yes. Took him home, and made him comfortable, and like a
thankless monster he ran away in the night and never has been seen
or heard of since till I set eyes on him just now. And that young lady
that was such a pretty dear caught his illness, lost her beautiful
looks, and wouldn't hardly be known for the same young lady now if it
wasn't for her angel temper, and her pretty shape, and her sweet
voice. Do you know it? You ungrateful wretch, do you know that this
is all along of you and of her goodness to you?’ demands the woman,
beginning to rage at him as she recalls it and breaking into passionate
tears.

The boy, in rough sort stunned by what he hears, falls to smearing his
dirty forehead with his dirty palm, and to staring at the ground, and
to shaking from head to foot until the crazy hoarding against which he
leans rattles.

Allan restrains the woman, merely by a quiet gesture, but effectually.

‘Richard told me--’ He falters. I mean, I have heard of this-- don't
mind me for a moment, I will speak presently.’

He turns away and stands for a while looking out at the covered
passage. When he comes back, he has recovered his composure,
except that he contends against an avoidance of the boy, which is so
very remarkable that it absorbs the woman's attention.

‘You hear what she says. But get up, get up!’

Jo, shaking and chattering, slowly rises and stands, after the manner
of his tribe in a difficulty, sideways against the hoarding, resting one
of his high shoulders against it and covertly rubbing his right hand

over his left and his left foot over his right.

‘You hear what she says, and I know it's true. Have you been here ever
since?’

‘Wishermaydie if I seen Tom-all-Alone's till this blessed morning,’
replies Jo hoarsely.

‘Why have you come here now?’

Jo looks all round the confined court, looks at his questioner no
higher than the knees, and finally answers, T don't know how to do
nothink, and I can't get nothink to do. I'm wery poor and ill, and I
thought I'd come back here when there warn't nobody about, and lay
down and hide somewheres as I knows on till arter dark, and then go
and beg a trifle of Mr Snagsby. He wos allus willin fur to give me
somethink he wos, though Mrs Snagsby she was allus a- chivying on
me--like everybody everywheres.’

‘Where have you come from?’

Jo looks all round the court again, looks at his questioner's knees
again, and concludes by laying his profile against the hoarding in a
sort of resignation.

‘Did you hear me ask you where you have come from?’
‘Tramp then,’ says Jo.

‘Now tell me,’ proceeds Allan, making a strong effort to overcome his
repugnance, going very near to him, and leaning over him with an
expression of confidence, ‘tell me how it came about that you left that
house when the good young lady had been so unfortunate as to pity
you and take you home.’

Jo suddenly comes out of his resignation and excitedly declares,
addressing the woman, that he never known about the young lady,
that he never heern about it, that he never went fur to hurt her, that
he would sooner have hurt his own self, that he'd sooner have had his
unfortnet ed chopped off than ever gone a-nigh her, and that she wos
wery good to him, she wos. Conducting himself throughout as if in his
poor fashion he really meant it, and winding up with some very
miserable sobs.

Allan Woodcourt sees that this is not a sham. He constrains himself to
touch him. ‘Come, Jo. Tell me.’

‘No. I dustn't,’ says Jo, relapsing into the profile state. I dustn't, or I
would.’

‘But I must know,’ returns the other, ‘all the same. Come, Jo.’

After two or three such adjurations, Jo lifts up his head again, looks
round the court again, and says in a low voice, ‘Well, I'll tell you
something. I was took away. There!’

‘Took away? In the night?’

‘Ah!’ Very apprehensive of being overheard, Jo looks about him and
even glances up some ten feet at the top of the hoarding and through
the cracks in it lest the object of his distrust should be looking over or
hidden on the other side.

‘Who took you away?’
T dustn't name him,’ says Jo. T dustn't do it, sir.’

‘But I want, in the young lady's name, to know. You may trust me. No
one else shall hear.’

‘Ah, but I don't know,’ replies Jo, shaking his head fearfully, ‘as he
DON'T hear.’

‘Why, he is not in this place.’

‘Oh, ain't he though?’ says Jo. ‘He's in all manner of places, all at
wanst.’

Allan looks at him in perplexity, but discovers some real meaning and
good faith at the bottom of this bewildering reply. He patiently awaits
an explicit answer; and Jo, more baffled by his patience than by
anything else, at last desperately whispers a name in his ear.

‘Aye!’ says Allan. ‘Why, what had you been doing?’

‘Nothink, sir. Never done nothink to get myself into no trouble, 'sept in
not moving on and the inkwhich. But I'm a-moving on now. I'm a-
moving on to the berryin ground--that's the move as I'm up to.’

‘No, no, we will try to prevent that. But what did he do with you?’

‘Put me in a horsepittle,’ replied Jo, whispering, ‘till I was discharged,
then giv me a little money--four half-bulls, wot you may call half-
crowns--and ses 'Hook it! Nobody wants you here,' he ses. 'You hook
it. You go and tramp,’ he ses. 'You move on,' he ses. 'Don't let me ever
see you nowheres within forty mile of London, or you'll repent it.' So I
shall, if ever he doos see me, and he'll see me if I'm above ground,’
concludes Jo, nervously repeating all his former precautions and
investigations.

Allan considers a little, then remarks, turning to the woman but
keeping an encouraging eye on Jo, ‘He is not so ungrateful as you
supposed. He had a reason for going away, though it was an
insufficient one.’

‘Thankee, sir, thankee!’ exclaims Jo. ‘There now! See how hard you
wos upon me. But ony you tell the young lady wot the genlmn ses,
and it's all right. For YOU wos wery good to me too, and I knows it.’
‘Now, Jo,’ says Allan, keeping his eye upon him, ‘come with me and I
will find you a better place than this to lie down and hide in. If I take
one side of the way and you the other to avoid observation, you will
not run away, I know very well, if you make me a promise.’

T won't, not unless I wos to see HIM a-coming, sir.’

Very well. I take your word. Half the town is getting up by this time,
and the whole town will be broad awake in another hour. Come along.
Good day again, my good woman.’

‘Good day again, sir, and I thank you kindly many times again.’

She has been sitting on her bag, deeply attentive, and now rises and
takes it up. Jo, repeating, ‘Ony you tell the young lady as I never went
fur to hurt her and wot the genlmn ses!’ nods and shambles and
shivers, and smears and blinks, and half laughs and half cries, a
farewell to her, and takes his creeping way along after Allan
Woodcourt, close to the houses on the opposite side of the street. In
this order, the two come up out of Tom-all-Alone's into the broad rays
of the sunlight and the purer air.
CHAPTER XLVII - Jo's Will

As Allan Woodcourt and Jo proceed along the streets where the high
church spires and the distances are so near and clear in the morning
light that the city itself seems renewed by rest, Allan revolves in his
mind how and where he shall bestow his companion. ‘Tt surely is a
strange fact,’ he considers, ‘that in the heart of a civilized world this
creature in human form should be more difficult to dispose of than an
unowned dog.’ But it is none the less a fact because of its
strangeness, and the difficulty remains.

At first he looks behind him often to assure himself that Jo is still
really following. But look where he will, he still beholds him close to
the opposite houses, making his way with his wary hand from brick to
brick and from door to door, and often, as he creeps along, glancing
over at him watchfully. Soon satisfied that the last thing in his
thoughts is to give him the slip, Allan goes on, considering with a less
divided attention what he shall do.

A breakfast-stall at a street-corner suggests the first thing to be done.
He stops there, looks round, and beckons Jo. Jo crosses and comes
halting and shuffling up, slowly scooping the knuckles of his right
hand round and round in the hollowed palm of his left, kneading dirt
with a natural pestle and mortar. What is a dainty repast to Jo is then
set before him, and he begins to gulp the coffee and to gnaw the bread
and butter, looking anxiously about him in all directions as he eats
and drinks, like a scared animal.

But he is so sick and miserable that even hunger has abandoned him.
T thought I was amost a-starvin, sir,’ says Jo, soon putting down his
food, ‘but I don't know nothink--not even that. I don't care for eating
wittles nor yet for drinking on 'em.’ And Jo stands shivering and
looking at the breakfast wonderingly.

Allan Woodcourt lays his hand upon his pulse and on his chest. ‘Draw
breath, Jo!’ ‘It draws,’ says Jo, ‘as heavy as a cart.’ He might add, ‘And
rattles like it,’ but he only mutters, I'm a- moving on, sir.’

Allan looks about for an apothecary's shop. There is none at hand, but
a tavern does as well or better. He obtains a little measure of wine and
gives the lad a portion of it very carefully. He begins to revive almost
as soon as it passes his lips. ‘We may repeat that dose, Jo,’ observes
Allan after watching him with his attentive face. ‘So! Now we will take
five minutes' rest, and then go on again.’

Leaving the boy sitting on the bench of the breakfast-stall, with his
back against an iron railing, Allan Woodcourt paces up and down in
the early sunshine, casting an occasional look towards him without
appearing to watch him. It requires no discernment to perceive that he
is warmed and refreshed. If a face so shaded can brighten, his face
brightens somewhat; and by little and little he eats the slice of bread
he had so hopelessly laid down. Observant of these signs of
improvement, Allan engages him in conversation and elicits to his no
small wonder the adventure of the lady in the veil, with all its
consequences. Jo slowly munches as he slowly tells it. When he has
finished his story and his bread, they go on again.

Intending to refer his difficulty in finding a temporary place of refuge
for the boy to his old patient, zealous little Miss Flite, Allan leads the
way to the court where he and Jo first foregathered. But all is changed
at the rag and bottle shop; Miss Flite no longer lodges there; it is shut
up; and a hard-featured female, much obscured by dust, whose age is
a problem, but who is indeed no other than the interesting Judy, is
tart and spare in her replies. These sufficing, however, to inform the
visitor that Miss Flite and her birds are domiciled with a Mrs Blinder,
in Bell Yard, he repairs to that neighbouring place, where Miss Flite
(who rises early that she may be punctual at the divan of justice held
by her excellent friend the Chancellor) comes running downstairs with
tears of welcome and with open arms.

‘My dear physician!’ cries Miss Flite. ‘My meritorious, distinguished,
honourable officer!’ She uses some odd expressions, but is as cordial
and full of heart as sanity itself can be--more so than it often is. Allan,
very patient with her, waits until she has no more raptures to express,
then points out Jo, trembling in a doorway, and tells her how he
comes there.

‘Where can I lodge him hereabouts for the present? Now, you have a
fund of knowledge and good sense and can advise me.’

Miss Flite, mighty proud of the compliment, sets herself to consider;
but it is long before a bright thought occurs to her. Mrs Blinder is
entirely let, and she herself occupies poor Gridley's room. ‘Gridley!’
exclaims Miss Flite, clapping her hands after a twentieth repetition of
this remark. ‘Gridley! To be sure! Of course! My dear physician!
General George will help us out.’

It is hopeless to ask for any information about General George, and
would be, though Miss Flite had not already run upstairs to put on
her pinched bonnet and her poor little shawl and to arm herself with
her reticule of documents. But as she informs her physician in her
disjointed manner on coming down in full array that General George,
whom she often calls upon, knows her dear Fitz Jarndyce and takes a
great interest in all connected with her, Allan is induced to think that
they may be in the right way. So he tells Jo, for his encouragement,
that this walking about will soon be over now; and they repair to the
general's. Fortunately it is not far.

From the exterior of George's Shooting Gallery, and the long entry,
and the bare perspective beyond it, Allan Woodcourt augurs well. He
also descries promise in the figure of Mr George himself, striding
towards them in his morning exercise with his pipe in his mouth, no
stock on, and his muscular arms, developed by broadsword and
dumbbell, weightily asserting themselves through his light shirt-
sleeves.

‘Your servant, sir,’ says Mr George with a military salute. Good-
humouredly smiling all over his broad forehead up into his crisp hair,
he then defers to Miss Flite, as, with great stateliness, and at some
length, she performs the courtly ceremony of presentation. He winds it
up with another ‘Your servant, sir!’ and another salute.

‘Excuse me, sir. A sailor, I believe?’ says Mr George.

T am proud to find I have the air of one,’ returns Allan; ‘but I am only
a sea-going doctor.’

Indeed, sir! I should have thought you was a regular blue-jacket
myself.’

Allan hopes Mr George will forgive his intrusion the more readily on
that account, and particularly that he will not lay aside his pipe,
which, in his politeness, he has testified some intention of doing. ‘You
are very good, sir,’ returns the trooper. ‘As I know by experience that
it's not disagreeable to Miss Flite, and since it's equally agreeable to
yourself--’ and finishes the sentence by putting it between his lips
again. Allan proceeds to tell him all he knows about Jo, unto which
the trooper listens with a grave face.

‘And that's the lad, sir, is it?’ he inquires, looking along the entry to
where Jo stands staring up at the great letters on the whitewashed
front, which have no meaning in his eyes.

‘That's he,’ says Allan. ‘And, Mr George, I am in this difficulty about
him. I am unwilling to place him in a hospital, even if I could procure
him immediate admission, because I foresee that he would not stay
there many hours if he could be so much as got there. The same
objection applies to a workhouse, supposing I had the patience to be
evaded and shirked, and handed about from post to pillar in trying to
get him into one, which is a system that I don't take kindly to.’

‘No man does, sir,’ returns Mr George.
T am convinced that he would not remain in either place, because he
is possessed by an extraordinary terror of this person who ordered
him to keep out of the way; in his ignorance, he believes this person to
be everywhere, and cognizant of everything.’

T ask your pardon, sir,’ says Mr George. ‘But you have not mentioned
that party's name. Is it a secret, sir?’

‘The boy makes it one. But his name is Bucket.’
‘Bucket the detective, sir?’
‘The same man.’

‘The man is known to me, sir,’ returns the trooper after blowing out a
cloud of smoke and squaring his chest, ‘and the boy is so far correct
that he undoubtedly is a--rum customer.’ Mr George smokes with a
profound meaning after this and surveys Miss Flite in silence.

‘Now, I wish Mr Jarndyce and Miss Summerson at least to know that
this Jo, who tells so strange a story, has reappeared, and to have it in
their power to speak with him if they should desire to do so. Therefore
I want to get him, for the present moment, into any poor lodging kept
by decent people where he would be admitted. Decent people and Jo,
Mr George,’ says Allan, following the direction of the trooper's eyes
along the entry, ‘have not been much acquainted, as you see. Hence
the difficulty. Do you happen to know any one in this neighbourhood
who would receive him for a while on my paying for him beforehand?’

As he puts the question, he becomes aware of a dirty-faced little man
standing at the trooper's elbow and looking up, with an oddly twisted
figure and countenance, into the trooper's face. After a few more puffs
at his pipe, the trooper looks down askant at the little man, and the
little man winks up at the trooper.

‘Well, sir,’ says Mr George, I can assure you that I would willingly be
knocked on the head at any time if it would be at all agreeable to Miss
Summerson, and consequently I esteem it a privilege to do that young
lady any service, however small. We are naturally in the vagabond way
here, sir, both myself and Phil. You see what the place is. You are
welcome to a quiet corner of it for the boy if the same would meet your
views. No charge made, except for rations. We are not in a flourishing
state of circumstances here, sir. We are liable to be tumbled out neck
and crop at a moment's notice. However, sir, such as the place is, and
so long as it lasts, here it is at your service.’

With a comprehensive wave of his pipe, Mr George places the whole
building at his visitor's disposal.
T take it for granted, sir,’ he adds, ‘you being one of the medical staff,
that there is no present infection about this unfortunate subject?’

Allan is quite sure of it.

‘Because, sir,’ says Mr George, shaking his head sorrowfully, ‘we have
had enough of that.’

His tone is no less sorrowfully echoed by his new acquaintance. ‘Still I
am bound to tell you,’ observes Allan after repeating his former
assurance, ‘that the boy is deplorably low and reduced and that he
may be--I do not say that he is--too far gone to recover.’

‘Do you consider him in present danger, sir?’ inquires the trooper.
Yes, I fear so.’

‘Then, sir,’ returns the trooper in a decisive manner, ‘it appears to me-
-being naturally in the vagabond way myself--that the sooner he
comes out of the street, the better. You, Phil! Bring him in!’

Mr Squod tacks out, all on one side, to execute the word of command;
and the trooper, having smoked his pipe, lays it by. Jo is brought in.
He is not one of Mrs Pardiggle's Tockahoopo Indians; he is not one of
Mrs Jellyby's lambs, being wholly unconnected with Borrioboola-Gha;
he is not softened by distance and unfamiliarity; he is not a genuine
foreign-grown savage; he is the ordinary home-made article. Dirty,
ugly, disagreeable to all the senses, in body a common creature of the
common streets, only in soul a heathen. Homely filth begrimes him,
homely parasites devour him, homely sores are in him, homely rags
are on him; native ignorance, the growth of English soil and climate,
sinks his immortal nature lower than the beasts that perish. Stand
forth, Jo, in uncompromising colours! From the sole of thy foot to the
crown of thy head, there is nothing interesting about thee.

He shuffles slowly into Mr George's gallery and stands huddled
together in a bundle, looking all about the floor. He seems to know
that they have an inclination to shrink from him, partly for what he is
and partly for what he has caused. He, too, shrinks from them. He is
not of the same order of things, not of the same place in creation. He
is of no order and no place, neither of the beasts nor of humanity.

‘Look here, Jo!’ says Allan. ‘This is Mr George.’

Jo searches the floor for some time longer, then looks up for a
moment, and then down again.
‘He is a kind friend to you, for he is going to give you lodging room
here.’

Jo makes a scoop with one hand, which is supposed to be a bow. After
a little more consideration and some backing and changing of the foot
on which he rests, he mutters that he is ‘wery thankful.’

‘You are quite safe here. All you have to do at present is to be obedient
and to get strong. And mind you tell us the truth here, whatever you
do, Jo.’

‘Wishermaydie if I don't, sir,’ says Jo, reverting to his favourite
declaration. I never done nothink yit, but wot you knows on, to get
myself into no trouble. I never was in no other trouble at all, sir, 'sept
not knowin' nothink and starwation.’

T believe it, now attend to Mr George. I see he is going to speak to

?

you.

‘My intention merely was, sir,’ observes Mr George, amazingly broad
and upright, ‘to point out to him where he can lie down and get a
thorough good dose of sleep. Now, look here.’ As the trooper speaks,
he conducts them to the other end of the gallery and opens one of the
little cabins. ‘There you are, you see! Here is a mattress, and here you
may rest, on good behaviour, as long as Mr, I ask your pardon, sir’--he
refers apologetically to the card Allan has given him--’Mr Woodcourt
pleases. Don't you be alarmed if you hear shots; they'll be aimed at
the target, and not you. Now, there's another thing I would
recommend, sir,’ says the trooper, turning to his visitor. ‘Phil, come
here!’

Phil bears down upon them according to his usual tactics. ‘Here is a
man, sir, who was found, when a baby, in the gutter. Consequently, it
is to be expected that he takes a natural interest in this poor creature.
You do, don't you, Phil?’

‘Certainly and surely I do, guv'ner,’ is Phil's reply.

‘Now I was thinking, sir,’ says Mr George in a martial sort of
confidence, as if he were giving his opinion in a council of war at a
drum-head, ‘that if this man was to take him to a bath and was to lay
out a few shillings in getting him one or two coarse articles--’

‘Mr George, my considerate friend,’ returns Allan, taking out his
purse, ‘it is the very favour I would have asked.’

Phil Squod and Jo are sent out immediately on this work of
improvement. Miss Flite, quite enraptured by her success, makes the
best of her way to court, having great fears that otherwise her friend
the Chancellor may be uneasy about her or may give the judgment
she has so long expected in her absence, and observing ‘which you
know, my dear physician, and general, after so many years, would be
too absurdly unfortunate!’ Allan takes the opportunity of going out to
procure some restorative medicines, and obtaining them near at hand,
soon returns to find the trooper walking up and down the gallery, and
to fall into step and walk with him.

T take it, sir,’ says Mr George, ‘that you know Miss Summerson pretty
well?’

Yes, it appears.
‘Not related to her, sir?’
No, it appears.

‘Excuse the apparent curiosity,’ says Mr George. It seemed to me
probable that you might take more than a common interest in this
poor creature because Miss Summerson had taken that unfortunate
interest in him. 'Tis MY case, sir, I assure you.’

‘And mine, Mr George.’

The trooper looks sideways at Allan's sunburnt cheek and bright dark
eye, rapidly measures his height and build, and seems to approve of
him.

‘Since you have been out, sir, I have been thinking that I
unquestionably know the rooms in Lincoln's Inn Fields, where Bucket
took the lad, according to his account. Though he is not acquainted
with the name, I can help you to it. It's Tulkinghorn. That's what it is.’

Allan looks at him inquiringly, repeating the name.

‘Tulkinghorn. That's the name, sir. I know the man, and know him to
have been in communication with Bucket before, respecting a
deceased person who had given him offence. I know the man, sir. To
my sorrow.’

Allan naturally asks what kind of man he is.

‘What kind of man! Do you mean to look at?’ T think I know that
much of him. I mean to deal with. Generally, what kind of man?’

‘Why, then I'll tell you, sir,’ returns the trooper, stopping short and
folding his arms on his square chest so angrily that his face fires and
flushes all over; ‘he is a confoundedly bad kind of man. He is a slow-
torturing kind of man. He is no more like flesh and blood than a rusty
old carbine is. He is a kind of man--by George!--that has caused me
more restlessness, and more uneasiness, and more dissatisfaction
with myself than all other men put together. That's the kind of man
Mr Tulkinghorn is!’

T am sorry,’ says Allan, ‘to have touched so sore a place.’

‘Sore?’ The trooper plants his legs wider apart, wets the palm of his
broad right hand, and lays it on the imaginary moustache. ‘t's no
fault of yours, sir; but you shall judge. He has got a power over me. He
is the man I spoke of just now as being able to tumble me out of this
place neck and crop. He keeps me on a constant see-saw. He won't
hold off, and he won't come on. If I have a payment to make him, or
time to ask him for, or anything to go to him about, he don't see me,
don't hear me--passes me on to Melchisedech's in Clifford's Inn,
Melchisedech's in Clifford's Inn passes me back again to him--he
keeps me prowling and dangling about him as if I was made of the
same stone as himself. Why, I spend half my life now, pretty well,
loitering and dodging about his door. What does he care? Nothing.
Just as much as the rusty old carbine I have compared him to. He
chafes and goads me till-- Bah! Nonsense! I am forgetting myself. Mr
Woodcourt,’ the trooper resumes his march, ‘all I say is, he is an old
man; but I am glad I shall never have the chance of setting spurs to
my horse and riding at him in a fair field. For if I had that chance, in
one of the humours he drives me into--he'd go down, sir!’

Mr George has been so excited that he finds it necessary to wipe his
forehead on his shirt-sleeve. Even while he whistles his impetuosity
away with the national anthem, some involuntary shakings of his
head and heavings of his chest still linger behind, not to mention an
occasional hasty adjustment with both hands of his open shirt-collar,
as if it were scarcely open enough to prevent his being troubled by a
choking sensation. In short, Allan Woodcourt has not much doubt
about the going down of Mr Tulkinghorn on the field referred to.

Jo and his conductor presently return, and Jo is assisted to his
mattress by the careful Phil, to whom, after due administration of
medicine by his own hands, Allan confides all needful means and
instructions. The morning is by this time getting on apace. He repairs
to his lodgings to dress and breakfast, and then, without seeking rest,
goes away to Mr Jarndyce to communicate his discovery.

With him Mr Jarndyce returns alone, confidentially telling him that
there are reasons for keeping this matter very quiet indeed and
showing a serious interest in it. To Mr Jarndyce, Jo repeats in
substance what he said in the morning, without any material
variation. Only that cart of his is heavier to draw, and draws with a
hollower sound.

‘Let me lay here quiet and not be chivied no more,’ falters Jo, ‘and be
so kind any person as is a-passin nigh where I used fur to sleep, as
jist to say to Mr Sangsby that Jo, wot he known once, is a-moving on
right forards with his duty, and I'll be wery thankful. I'd be more
thankful than I am aready if it wos any ways possible for an unfortnet
to be it.’

He makes so many of these references to the law-stationer in the
course of a day or two that Allan, after conferring with Mr Jarndyce,
good-naturedly resolves to call in Cook's Court, the rather, as the cart
seems to be breaking down.

To Cook's Court, therefore, he repairs. Mr Snagsby is behind his
counter in his grey coat and sleeves, inspecting an indenture of
several skins which has just come in from the engrosser's, an
immense desert of law-hand and parchment, with here and there a
resting-place of a few large letters to break the awful monotony and
save the traveller from despair. Mr Snagsby puts up at one of these
inky wells and greets the stranger with his cough of general
preparation for business.

‘You don't remember me, Mr Snagsby?’

The stationer's heart begins to thump heavily, for his old
apprehensions have never abated. It is as much as he can do to
answer, ‘No, sir, I can't say I do. I should have considered--not to put
too fine a point upon it--that I never saw you before, sir.’

‘Twice before,’ says Allan Woodcourt. ‘Once at a poor bedside, and
once--’

It's come at last!’ thinks the afflicted stationer, as recollection breaks
upon him. ‘It's got to a head now and is going to burst!’ But he has
sufficient presence of mind to conduct his visitor into the little
counting-house and to shut the door.

‘Are you a married man, sir?’

‘No, I am not.’

‘Would you make the attempt, though single,’ says Mr Snagsby in a
melancholy whisper, ‘to speak as low as you can? For my little woman

is a-listening somewheres, or I'll forfeit the business and five hundred
pound!’
In deep dejection Mr Snagsby sits down on his stool, with his back
against his desk, protesting, I never had a secret of my own, sir. I
can't charge my memory with ever having once attempted to deceive
my littl woman on my own account since she named the day. I
wouldn't have done it, sir. Not to put too fine a point upon it, I
couldn't have done it, I dursn't have done it. Whereas, and
nevertheless, I find myself wrapped round with secrecy and mystery,
till my life is a burden to me.’

His visitor professes his regret to hear it and asks him does he
remember Jo. Mr Snagsby answers with a suppressed groan, oh, don't
he!

‘YYou couldn't name an individual human being--except myself--that
my little woman is more set and determined against than Jo,’ says Mr
Snagsby.

Allan asks why.

‘Why?’ repeats Mr Snagsby, in his desperation clutching at the clump
of hair at the back of his bald head. ‘How should I know why? But you
are a single person, sir, and may you long be spared to ask a married
person such a question!’

With this beneficent wish, Mr Snagsby coughs a cough of dismal
resignation and submits himself to hear what the visitor has to
communicate.

‘There again!’ says Mr Snagsby, who, between the earnestness of his
feelings and the suppressed tones of his voice is discoloured in the
face. ‘At it again, in a new direction! A certain person charges me, in
the solemnest way, not to talk of Jo to any one, even my little woman.
Then comes another certain person, in the person of yourself, and
charges me, in an equally solemn way, not to mention Jo to that other
certain person above all other persons. Why, this is a private asylum!
Why, not to put too fine a point upon it, this is Bedlam, sir!’ says Mr
Snagsby.

But it is better than he expected after all, being no explosion of the
mine below him or deepening of the pit into which he has fallen. And
being tender-hearted and affected by the account he hears of Jo's
condition, he readily engages to ‘ook round’ as early in the evening as
he can manage it quietly. He looks round very quietly when the
evening comes, but it may turn out that Mrs Snagsby is as quiet a
manager as he.

Jo is very glad to see his old friend and says, when they are left alone,
that he takes it uncommon kind as Mr Sangsby should come so far
out of his way on accounts of sich as him. Mr Snagsby, touched by
the spectacle before him, immediately lays upon the table half a
crown, that magic balsam of his for all kinds of wounds.

‘And how do you find yourself, my poor lad?’ inquires the stationer
with his cough of sympathy.

T am in luck, Mr Sangsby, I am,’ returns Jo, ‘and don't want for
nothink. I'm more cumfbler nor you can't think. Mr Sangsby! I'm wery
sorry that I done it, but I didn't go fur to do it, sir.’

The stationer softly lays down another half-crown and asks him what
it is that he is sorry for having done.

‘Mr Sangsby,’ says Jo, ‘ went and giv a illness to the lady as wos and
yit as warn't the t'other lady, and none of 'em never says nothink to
me for having done it, on accounts of their being ser good and my
having been s'unfortnet. The lady come herself and see me yesday,
and she ses, 'Ah, Jo!' she ses. 'We thought we'd lost you, Jo!' she ses.
And she sits down a-smilin so quiet, and don't pass a word nor yit a
look upon me for having done it, she don't, and I turns agin the wall, I
doos, Mr Sangsby. And Mr Jarnders, I see him a-forced to turn away
his own self. And Mr Woodcot, he come fur to giv me somethink fur to
ease me, wot he's allus a-doin' on day and night, and wen he come a-
bending over me and a-speakin up so bold, I see his tears a-fallin, Mr
Sangsby.’

The softened stationer deposits another half-crown on the table.
Nothing less than a repetition of that infallible remedy will relieve his
feelings.

‘Wot I was a-thinkin on, Mr Sangsby,’ proceeds Jo, ‘wos, as you wos
able to write wery large, p'raps?’

‘Yes, Jo, please God,’ returns the stationer.
‘Uncommon precious large, p'raps?’ says Jo with eagerness.
‘Yes, my poor boy.’

Jo laughs with pleasure. ‘Wot I wos a-thinking on then, Mr Sangsby,
wos, that when I wos moved on as fur as ever I could go and couldn't
be moved no furder, whether you might be so good p'raps as to write
out, wery large so that any one could see it anywheres, as that I wos
wery truly hearty sorry that I done it and that I never went fur to do it,
and that though I didn't know nothink at all, I knowd as Mr Woodcot
once cried over it and wos allus grieved over it, and that I hoped as
he'd be able to forgive me in his mind. If the writin could be made to
say it wery large, he might.’

Tt shall say it, Jo. Very large.’

Jo laughs again. ‘Thankee, Mr Sangsby. It's wery kind of you, sir, and
it makes me more cumfbler nor I was afore.’

The meek little stationer, with a broken and unfinished cough, slips
down his fourth half-crown--he has never been so close to a case
requiring so many--and is fain to depart. And Jo and he, upon this
little earth, shall meet no more. No more.

For the cart so hard to draw is near its journey's end and drags over
stony ground. All round the clock it labours up the broken steps,
shattered and worn. Not many times can the sun rise and behold it
still upon its weary road.

Phil Squod, with his smoky gunpowder visage, at once acts as nurse
and works as armourer at his little table in a corner, often looking
round and saying with a nod of his green-baize cap and an
encouraging elevation of his one eyebrow, ‘Hold up, my boy! Hold up!’
There, too, is Mr Jarndyce many a time, and Allan Woodcourt almost
always, both thinking, much, how strangely fate has entangled this
rough outcast in the web of very different lives. There, too, the trooper
is a frequent visitor, filling the doorway with his athletic figure and,
from his superfluity of life and strength, seeming to shed down
temporary vigour upon Jo, who never fails to speak more robustly in
answer to his cheerful words.

Jo is in a sleep or in a stupor to-day, and Allan Woodcourt, newly
arrived, stands by him, looking down upon his wasted form. After a
while he softly seats himself upon the bedside with his face towards
him--just as he sat in the law-writer's room--and touches his chest
and heart. The cart had very nearly given up, but labours on a little
more.

The trooper stands in the doorway, still and silent. Phil has stopped in
a low clinking noise, with his little hammer in his hand. Mr
Woodcourt looks round with that grave professional interest and
attention on his face, and glancing significantly at the trooper, signs
to Phil to carry his table out. When the little hammer is next used,
there will be a speck of rust upon it.

‘Well, Jo! What is the matter? Don't be frightened.’
T thought,’ says Jo, who has started and is looking round, ‘I thought I
was in Tom-all-Alone's agin. Ain't there nobody here but you, Mr
Woodcot?’

‘Nobody.’
‘And I ain't took back to Tom-all-Alone's. Am I, sir?’
‘No.’ Jo closes his eyes, muttering, I'm wery thankful.’

After watching him closely a little while, Allan puts his mouth very
near his ear and says to him in a low, distinct voice, ‘Jo! Did you ever
know a prayer?’

‘Never knowd nothink, sir.’
‘Not so much as one short prayer?’

‘No, sir. Nothink at all. Mr Chadbands he wos a-prayin wunst at Mr
Sangsby's and I heerd him, but he sounded as if he wos a- speakin to
hisself, and not to me. He prayed a lot, but I couldn't make out
nothink on it. Different times there was other genlmen come down
Tom-all-Alone's a-prayin, but they all mostly sed as the t'other 'wuns
prayed wrong, and all mostly sounded to be a-talking to theirselves, or
a-passing blame on the t'others, and not a- talkin to us. WE never
knowd nothink. I never knowd what it wos all about.’

It takes him a long time to say this, and few but an experienced and
attentive listener could hear, or, hearing, understand him. After a
short relapse into sleep or stupor, he makes, of a sudden, a strong
effort to get out of bed.

‘Stay, Jo! What now?’

It's time for me to go to that there berryin ground, sir,’ he returns
with a wild look.

‘Lie down, and tell me. What burying ground, Jo?’

‘Where they laid him as wos wery good to me, wery good to me indeed,
he wos. It's time fur me to go down to that there berryin ground, sir,
and ask to be put along with him. I wants to go there and be berried.
He used fur to say to me, 'I am as poor as you to- day, Jo,' he ses. I
wants to tell him that I am as poor as him now and have come there
to be laid along with him.’

‘By and by, Jo. By and by.’
‘Ah! P'raps they wouldn't do it if I wos to go myself. But will you
promise to have me took there, sir, and laid along with him?’

T will, indeed.’

‘Thankee, sir. Thankee, sir. They'll have to get the key of the gate afore
they can take me in, for it's allus locked. And there's a step there, as I
used for to clean with my broom. It's turned wery dark, sir. Is there
any light a-comin?’

‘Tt is coming fast, Jo.’

Fast. The cart is shaken all to pieces, and the rugged road is very near
its end.

‘Jo, my poor fellow!’

T hear you, sir, in the dark, but I'm a-gropin--a-gropin--let me catch
hold of your hand.’

‘Jo, can you say what I say?’

Tll say anythink as you say, sir, for I knows it's good.’

‘Our Father.’

‘Our Father! Yes, that's wery good, sir.’

‘Which art in heaven.’

‘Art in heaven--is the light a-comin, sir?’

‘Tt is close at hand. Hallowed by thy name!’

‘Hallowed be--thy--’

The light is come upon the dark benighted way. Dead!

Dead, your Majesty. Dead, my lords and gentlemen. Dead, right
reverends and wrong reverends of every order. Dead, men and women,

born with heavenly compassion in your hearts. And dying thus
around us every day.
CHAPTER XLVIII - Closing in

The place in Lincolnshire has shut its many eyes again, and the house
in town is awake. In Lincolnshire the Dedlocks of the past doze in
their picture-frames, and the low wind murmurs through the long
drawing-room as if they were breathing pretty regularly. In town the
Dedlocks of the present rattle in their fire-eyed carriages through the
darkness of the night, and the Dedlock Mercuries, with ashes (or hair-
powder) on their heads, symptomatic of their great humility, loll away
the drowsy mornings in the little windows of the hall. The fashionable
world--tremendous orb, nearly five miles round--is in full swing, and
the solar system works respectfully at its appointed distances.

Where the throng is thickest, where the lights are brightest, where all
the senses are ministered to with the greatest delicacy and refinement,
Lady Dedlock is. From the shining heights she has scaled and taken,
she is never absent. Though the belief she of old reposed in herself as
one able to reserve whatsoever she would under her mantle of pride is
beaten down, though she has no assurance that what she is to those
around her she will remain another day, it is not in her nature when
envious eyes are looking on to yield or to droop. They say of her that
she has lately grown more handsome and more haughty. The
debilitated cousin says of her that she's beauty nough--tsetup
shopofwomen--but rather larming kind--remindingmanfact--
inconvenient woman--who WILL getoutofbedandbawthstahlishment--
Shakespeare.

Mr Tulkinghorn says nothing, looks nothing. Now, as heretofore, he is
to be found in doorways of rooms, with his limp white cravat loosely
twisted into its old-fashioned tie, receiving patronage from the peerage
and making no sign. Of all men he is still the last who might be
supposed to have any influence upon my Lady. Of all women she is
still the last who might be supposed to have any dread of him.

One thing has been much on her mind since their late interview in his
turret-room at Chesney Wold. She is now decided, and prepared to
throw it off.

It is morning in the great world, afternoon according to the little sun.
The Mercuries, exhausted by looking out of window, are reposing in
the hall and hang their heavy heads, the gorgeous creatures, like
overblown sunflowers. Like them, too, they seem to run to a deal of
seed in their tags and trimmings. Sir Leicester, in the library, has
fallen asleep for the good of the country over the report of a
Parliamentary committee. My Lady sits in the room in which she gave
audience to the young man of the name of Guppy. Rosa is with her
and has been writing for her and reading to her. Rosa is now at work
upon embroidery or some such pretty thing, and as she bends her
head over it, my Lady watches her in silence. Not for the first time to-
day.

‘Rosa.’

The pretty village face looks brightly up. Then, seeing how serious my
Lady is, looks puzzled and surprised.

‘See to the door. Is it shut?’
Yes. She goes to it and returns, and looks yet more surprised.

T am about to place confidence in you, child, for I know I may trust
your attachment, if not your judgment. In what I am going to do, I will
not disguise myself to you at least. But I confide in you. Say nothing
to any one of what passes between us.’

The timid little beauty promises in all earnestness to be trustworthy.

‘Do you know,’ Lady Dedlock asks her, signing to her to bring her
chair nearer, ‘do you know, Rosa, that I am different to you from what
Iam to any one?’

‘Yes, my Lady. Much kinder. But then I often think I know you as you
really are.’

‘You often think you know me as I really am? Poor child, poor child!’

She says it with a kind of scorn--though not of Rosa--and sits
brooding, looking dreamily at her.

‘Do you think, Rosa, you are any relief or comfort to me? Do you
suppose your being young and natural, and fond of me and grateful to
me, makes it any pleasure to me to have you near me?’

T don't know, my Lady; I can scarcely hope so. But with all my heart, I
wish it was so.’

It is so, little one.’

The pretty face is checked in its flush of pleasure by the dark
expression on the handsome face before it. It looks timidly for an
explanation.

‘And if I were to say to-day, 'Go! Leave me!' I should say what would
give me great pain and disquiet, child, and what would leave me very
solitary.’
‘My Lady! Have I offended you?’
‘In nothing. Come here.’

Rosa bends down on the footstool at my Lady's feet. My Lady, with
that motherly touch of the famous ironmaster night, lays her hand
upon her dark hair and gently keeps it there.

T told you, Rosa, that I wished you to be happy and that I would make
you so if I could make anybody happy on this earth. I cannot. There
are reasons now known to me, reasons in which you have no part,
rendering it far better for you that you should not remain here. You
must not remain here. I have determined that you shall not. I have
written to the father of your lover, and he will be here to-day. All this I
have done for your sake.’

The weeping girl covers her hand with kisses and says what shall she
do, what shall she do, when they are separated! Her mistress kisses
her on the cheek and makes no other answer.

‘Now, be happy, child, under better circumstances. Be beloved and
happy!’

‘Ah, my Lady, I have sometimes thought--forgive my being so free--
that YOU are not happy.’

TV’

‘Will you be more so when you have sent me away? Pray, pray, think
again. Let me stay a little while!’

T have said, my child, that what I do, I do for your sake, not my own.
It is done. What I am towards you, Rosa, is what I am now-- not what
I shall be a little while hence. Remember this, and keep my
confidence. Do so much for my sake, and thus all ends between us!’

She detaches herself from her simple-hearted companion and leaves
the room. Late in the afternoon, when she next appears upon the
staircase, she is in her haughtiest and coldest state. As indifferent as
if all passion, feeling, and interest had been worn out in the earlier
ages of the world and had perished from its surface with its other
departed monsters.

Mercury has announced Mr Rouncewell, which is the cause of her
appearance. Mr Rouncewell is not in the library, but she repairs to the

library. Sir Leicester is there, and she wishes to speak to him first.

‘Sir Leicester, I am desirous--but you are engaged.’
Oh, dear no! Not at all. Only Mr Tulkinghorn.

Always at hand. Haunting every place. No relief or security from him
for a moment.

T beg your pardon, Lady Dedlock. Will you allow me to retire?’

With a look that plainly says, ‘You know you have the power to remain
if you will,’ she tells him it is not necessary and moves towards a
chair. Mr Tulkinghorn brings it a little forward for her with his clumsy
bow and retires into a window opposite. Interposed between her and
the fading light of day in the now quiet street, his shadow falls upon
her, and he darkens all before her. Even so does he darken her life.

It is a dull street under the best conditions, where the two long rows
of houses stare at each other with that severity that half-a- dozen of
its greatest mansions seem to have been slowly stared into stone
rather than originally built in that material. It is a street of such
dismal grandeur, so determined not to condescend to liveliness, that
the doors and windows hold a gloomy state of their own in black paint
and dust, and the echoing mews behind have a dry and massive
appearance, as if they were reserved to stable the stone chargers of
noble statues. Complicated garnish of iron-work entwines itself over
the flights of steps in this awful street, and from these petrified
bowers, extinguishers for obsolete flambeaux gasp at the upstart gas.
Here and there a weak little iron hoop, through which bold boys aspire
to throw their friends' caps (its only present use), retains its place
among the rusty foliage, sacred to the memory of departed oil. Nay,
even oil itself, yet lingering at long intervals in a little absurd glass
pot, with a knob in the bottom like an oyster, blinks and sulks at
newer lights every night, like its high and dry master in the House of
Lords.

Therefore there is not much that Lady Dedlock, seated in her chair,
could wish to see through the window in which Mr Tulkinghorn
stands. And yet--and yet--she sends a look in that direction as if it
were her heart's desire to have that figure moved out of the way.

Sir Leicester begs his Lady's pardon. She was about to say?
‘Only that Mr Rouncewell is here (he has called by my appointment)
and that we had better make an end of the question of that girl. I am

tired to death of the matter.’

What can I do--to--assist?’ demands Sir Leicester in some
considerable doubt.
‘Let us see him here and have done with it. Will you tell them to send
him up?’

‘Mr Tulkinghorn, be so good as to ring. Thank you. Request,’ says Sir
Leicester to Mercury, not immediately remembering the business
term, ‘request the iron gentleman to walk this way.’

Mercury departs in search of the iron gentleman, finds, and produces
him. Sir Leicester receives that ferruginous person graciously.

T hope you are well, Mr Rouncewell. Be seated. (My solicitor, Mr
Tulkinghorn.) My Lady was desirous, Mr Rouncewell,’ Sir Leicester
skilfully transfers him with a solemn wave of his hand, ‘was desirous
to speak with you. Hem!’

T shall be very happy,’ returns the iron gentleman, ‘to give my best
attention to anything Lady Dedlock does me the honour to say.’

As he turns towards her, he finds that the impression she makes
upon him is less agreeable than on the former occasion. A distant
supercilious air makes a cold atmosphere about her, and there is
nothing in her bearing, as there was before, to encourage openness.

‘Pray, sir,’ says Lady Dedlock listlessly, ‘may I be allowed to inquire
whether anything has passed between you and your son respecting
your son's fancy?’

It is almost too troublesome to her languid eyes to bestow a look upon
him as she asks this question.

If my memory serves me, Lady Dedlock, I said, when I had the
pleasure of seeing you before, that I should seriously advise my son to
conquer that--fancy.’ The ironmaster repeats her expression with a
little emphasis.

‘And did you?’

‘Oh! Of course I did.’

Sir Leicester gives a nod, approving and confirmatory. Very proper.
The iron gentleman, having said that he would do it, was bound to do
it. No difference in this respect between the base metals and the
precious. Highly proper.

‘And pray has he done so?’

‘Really, Lady Dedlock, I cannot make you a definite reply. I fear not.
Probably not yet. In our condition of life, we sometimes couple an
intention with our--our fancies which renders them not altogether
easy to throw off. I think it is rather our way to be in earnest.’

Sir Leicester has a misgiving that there may be a hidden Wat Tylerish
meaning in this expression, and fumes a little. Mr Rouncewell is
perfectly good-humoured and polite, but within such limits, evidently
adapts his tone to his reception.

‘Because,’ proceeds my Lady, IT have been thinking of the subject,
which is tiresome to me.’

T am very sorry, I am sure.’

‘And also of what Sir Leicester said upon it, in which I quite concur’--
Sir Leicester flattered--’and if you cannot give us the assurance that
this fancy is at an end, I have come to the conclusion that the girl had
better leave me.’

IT can give no such assurance, Lady Dedlock. Nothing of the kind.’
‘Then she had better go.’

‘Excuse me, my Lady,’ Sir Leicester considerately interposes, ‘but
perhaps this may be doing an injury to the young woman which she
has not merited. Here is a young woman,’ says Sir Leicester,
magnificently laying out the matter with his right hand like a service
of plate, ‘whose good fortune it is to have attracted the notice and
favour of an eminent lady and to live, under the protection of that
eminent lady, surrounded by the various advantages which such a
position confers, and which are unquestionably very great--I believe
unquestionably very great, sir--for a young woman in that station of
life. The question then arises, should that young woman be deprived
of these many advantages and that good fortune simply because she
has’--Sir Leicester, with an apologetic but dignified inclination of his
head towards the ironmaster, winds up his sentence--’has attracted
the notice of Mr Rouncewell's son? Now, has she deserved this
punishment? Is this just towards her? Is this our previous
understanding?’

T beg your pardon,’ interposes Mr Rouncewell's son's father. ‘Sir
Leicester, will you allow me? I think I may shorten the subject. Pray
dismiss that from your consideration. If you remember anything so
unimportant--which is not to be expected--you would recollect that
my first thought in the affair was directly opposed to her remaining
here.’

Dismiss the Dedlock patronage from consideration? Oh! Sir Leicester
is bound to believe a pair of ears that have been handed down to him
through such a family, or he really might have mistrusted their report
of the iron gentleman's observations.

‘Tt is not necessary,’ observes my Lady in her coldest manner before he
can do anything but breathe amazedly, ‘to enter into these matters on
either side. The girl is a very good girl; I have nothing whatever to say
against her, but she is so far insensible to her many advantages and
her good fortune that she is in love--or supposes she is, poor little
fool--and unable to appreciate them.’

Sir Leicester begs to observe that wholly alters the case. He might
have been sure that my Lady had the best grounds and reasons in
support of her view. He entirely agrees with my Lady. The young
woman had better go.

‘As Sir Leicester observed, Mr Rouncewell, on the last occasion when
we were fatigued by this business,’ Lady Dedlock languidly proceeds,
‘we cannot make conditions with you. Without conditions, and under
present circumstances, the girl is quite misplaced here and had better
go. I have told her so. Would you wish to have her sent back to the
village, or would you like to take her with you, or what would you
prefer?’

‘Lady Dedlock, if I may speak plainly--’
‘By all means.’

‘“--I should prefer the course which will the soonest relieve you of the
incumbrance and remove her from her present position.’

‘And to speak as plainly,’ she returns with the same _ studied
carelessness, ‘so should I. Do I understand that you will take her with
you?’

The iron gentleman makes an iron bow.

‘Sir Leicester, will you ring?’ Mr Tulkinghorn steps forward from his
window and pulls the bell. IT had forgotten you. Thank you.’ He makes
his usual bow and goes quietly back again. Mercury, swift-responsive,
appears, receives instructions whom to produce, skims away,
produces the aforesaid, and departs.

Rosa has been crying and is yet in distress. On her coming in, the
ironmaster leaves his chair, takes her arm in his, and remains with
her near the door ready to depart.
‘You are taken charge of, you see,’ says my Lady in her weary manner,
‘and are going away well protected. I have mentioned that you are a
very good girl, and you have nothing to cry for.’

‘She seems after all,’ observes Mr Tulkinghorn, loitering a little
forward with his hands behind him, ‘as if she were crying at going
away.’

‘Why, she is not well-bred, you see,’ returns Mr Rouncewell with some
quickness in his manner, as if he were glad to have the lawyer to
retort upon, ‘and she is an inexperienced little thing and knows no
better. If she had remained here, sir, she would have improved, no
doubt.’

‘No doubt,’ is Mr Tulkinghorn's composed reply.

Rosa sobs out that she is very sorry to leave my Lady, and that she
was happy at Chesney Wold, and has been happy with my Lady, and
that she thanks my Lady over and over again. ‘Out, you silly little
puss!’ says the ironmaster, checking her in a low voice, though not
angrily. ‘Have a spirit, if you're fond of Watt!’ My Lady merely waves
her off with indifference, saying, ‘There, there, child! You are a good
girl. Go away!’ Sir Leicester has magnificently disengaged himself from
the subject and retired into the sanctuary of his blue coat. Mr
Tulkinghorn, an indistinct form against the dark street now dotted
with lamps, looms in my Lady's view, bigger and blacker than before.

‘Sir Leicester and Lady Dedlock,’ says Mr Rouncewell after a pause of
a few moments, ‘I beg to take my leave, with an apology for having
again troubled you, though not of my own act, on this tiresome
subject. I can very well understand, I assure you, how tiresome so
small a matter must have become to Lady Dedlock. If I am doubtful of
my dealing with it, it is only because I did not at first quietly exert my
influence to take my young friend here away without troubling you at
all. But it appeared to me--I dare say magnifying the importance of the
thing--that it was respectful to explain to you how the matter stood
and candid to consult your wishes and convenience. I hope you will
excuse my want of acquaintance with the polite world.’

Sir Leicester considers himself evoked out of the sanctuary by these
remarks. ‘Mr Rouncewell,’ he returns, ‘do not mention it.
Justifications are unnecessary, I hope, on either side.’

T am glad to hear it, Sir Leicester; and if I may, by way of a last word,
revert to what I said before of my mother's long connexion with the
family and the worth it bespeaks on both sides, I would point out this
little instance here on my arm who shows herself so affectionate and
faithful in parting and in whom my mother, I dare say, has done
something to awaken such feelings-- though of course Lady Dedlock,
by her heartfelt interest and her genial condescension, has done much
more.’

If he mean this ironically, it may be truer than he thinks. He points it,
however, by no deviation from his straightforward manner of speech,
though in saying it he turns towards that part of the dim room where
my Lady sits. Sir Leicester stands to return his parting salutation, Mr
Tulkinghorn again rings, Mercury takes another flight, and Mr
Rouncewell and Rosa leave the house.

Then lights are brought in, discovering Mr Tulkinghorn still standing
in his window with his hands behind him and my Lady still sitting
with his figure before her, closing up her view of the night as well as of
the day. She is very pale. Mr Tulkinghorn, observing it as she rises to
retire, thinks, ‘Well she may be! The power of this woman is
astonishing. She has been acting a part the whole time.’ But he can
act a part too--his one unchanging character--and as he holds the
door open for this woman, fifty pairs of eyes, each fifty times sharper
than Sir Leicester's pair, should find no flaw in him.

Lady Dedlock dines alone in her own room to-day. Sir Leicester is
whipped in to the rescue of the Doodle Party and the discomfiture of
the Coodle Faction. Lady Dedlock asks on sitting down to dinner, still
deadly pale (and quite an illustration of the debilitated cousin's text),
whether he is gone out? Yes. Whether Mr Tulkinghorn is gone yet? No.
Presently she asks again, is he gone YET? No. What is he doing?
Mercury thinks he is writing letters in the library. Would my Lady
wish to see him? Anything but that.

But he wishes to see my Lady. Within a few more minutes he is
reported as sending his respects, and could my Lady please to receive
him for a word or two after her dinner? My Lady will receive him now.
He comes now, apologizing for intruding, even by her permission,
while she is at table. When they are alone, my Lady waves her hand to
dispense with such mockeries.

‘What do you want, sir?’

‘Why, Lady Dedlock,’ says the lawyer, taking a chair at a little distance
from her and slowly rubbing his rusty legs up and down, up and
down, up and down, JT am rather surprised by the course you have
taken.’

Indeed?’

‘Yes, decidedly. I was not prepared for it. I consider it a departure from
our agreement and your promise. It puts us in a new position, Lady
Dedlock. I feel myself under the necessity of saying that I don't
approve of it.’

He stops in his rubbing and looks at her, with his hands on his knees.
Imperturbable and unchangeable as he is, there is still an indefinable
freedom in his manner which is new and which does not escape this
woman's observation.

T do not quite understand you.’

‘Oh, yes you do, I think. I think you do. Come, come, Lady Dedlock,
we must not fence and parry now. You know you like this girl.’

Well, sir?’

‘And you know--and I know--that you have not sent her away for the
reasons you have assigned, but for the purpose of separating her as
much as possible from--excuse my mentioning it as a matter of
business--any reproach and exposure that impend over yourself.’

Well, sir?’

‘Well, Lady Dedlock,’ returns the lawyer, crossing his legs and nursing
the uppermost knee. T object to that. I consider that a dangerous
proceeding. I know it to be unnecessary and calculated to awaken
speculation, doubt, rumour, I don't know what, in the house. Besides,
it is a violation of our agreement. You were to be exactly what you
were before. Whereas, it must be evident to yourself, as it is to me,
that you have been this evening very different from what you were
before. Why, bless my soul, Lady Dedlock, transparently so!’

Tf, sir,’ she begins, ‘in my knowledge of my secret--’ But he interrupts
her.

‘Now, Lady Dedlock, this is a matter of business, and in a matter of
business the ground cannot be kept too clear. It is no longer your
secret. Excuse me. That is just the mistake. It is my secret, in trust for
Sir Leicester and the family. If it were your secret, Lady Dedlock, we
should not be here holding this conversation.’

‘That is very true. If in my knowledge of THE secret I do what I can to
spare an innocent girl (especially, remembering your own reference to
her when you told my story to the assembled guests at Chesney Wold)
from the taint of my impending shame, I act upon a resolution I have
taken. Nothing in the world, and no one in the world, could shake it or
could move me.’ This she says with great deliberation and distinctness
and with no more outward passion than himself. As for him, he
methodically discusses his matter of business as if she were any
insensible instrument used in business.

‘Really? Then you see, Lady Dedlock,’ he returns, ‘you are not to be
trusted. You have put the case in a perfectly plain way, and according
to the literal fact; and that being the case, you are not to be trusted.’

‘Perhaps you may remember that I expressed some anxiety on this
same point when we spoke at night at Chesney Wold?’

Yes,’ says Mr Tulkinghorn, coolly getting up and standing on the
hearth. ‘Yes. I recollect, Lady Dedlock, that you certainly referred to
the girl, but that was before we came to our arrangement, and both
the letter and the spirit of our arrangement altogether precluded any
action on your part founded upon my discovery. There can be no
doubt about that. As to sparing the girl, of what importance or value
is she? Spare! Lady Dedlock, here is a family name compromised. One
might have supposed that the course was straight on--over everything,
neither to the right nor to the left, regardless of all considerations in
the way, sparing nothing, treading everything under foot.’

She has been looking at the table. She lifts up her eyes and looks at
him. There is a stern expression on her face and a part of her lower lip
is compressed under her teeth. ‘This woman understands me,’ Mr
Tulkinghorn thinks as she lets her glance fall again. ‘SHE cannot be
spared. Why should she spare others?’

For a little while they are silent. Lady Dedlock has eaten no dinner,
but has twice or thrice poured out water with a steady hand and
drunk it. She rises from table, takes a lounging-chair, and reclines in
it, shading her face. There is nothing in her manner to express
weakness or excite compassion. It is thoughtful, gloomy,
concentrated. ‘This woman,’ thinks Mr Tulkinghorn, standing on the
hearth, again a dark object closing up her view, ‘is a study.’

He studies her at his leisure, not speaking for a time. She too studies
something at her leisure. She is not the first to speak, appearing
indeed so unlikely to be so, though he stood there until midnight, that
even he is driven upon breaking silence.

‘Lady Dedlock, the most disagreeable part of this business interview
remains, but it is business. Our agreement is broken. A lady of your
sense and strength of character will be prepared for my now declaring
it void and taking my own course.’

T am quite prepared.’
Mr Tulkinghorn inclines his head. ‘That is all I have to trouble you
with, Lady Dedlock.’

She stops him as he is moving out of the room by asking, ‘This is the
notice I was to receive? I wish not to misapprehend you.’

‘Not exactly the notice you were to receive, Lady Dedlock, because the
contemplated notice supposed the agreement to have been observed.
But virtually the same, virtually the same. The difference is merely in
a lawyer's mind.’

‘You intend to give me no other notice?’
‘You are right. No.’
‘Do you contemplate undeceiving Sir Leicester to-night?’

‘A home question!’ says Mr Tulkinghorn with a slight smile and
cautiously shaking his head at the shaded face. ‘No, not to- night.’

‘To-morrow?’

‘All things considered, I had better decline answering that question,
Lady Dedlock. If I were to say I don't know when, exactly, you would
not believe me, and it would answer no purpose. It may be to-morrow.
I would rather say no more. You are prepared, and I hold out no
expectations which circumstances might fail to justify. I wish you
good evening.’

She removes her hand, turns her pale face towards him as he walks
silently to the door, and stops him once again as he is about to open
it.

‘Do you intend to remain in the house any time? I heard you were
writing in the library. Are you going to return there?’

‘Only for my hat. Iam going home.’

She bows her eyes rather than her head, the movement is so slight
and curious, and he withdraws. Clear of the room he looks at his
watch but is inclined to doubt it by a minute or thereabouts. There is
a splendid clock upon the staircase, famous, as splendid clocks not
often are, for its accuracy. ‘And what do YOU say,’ Mr Tulkinghorn
inquires, referring to it. ‘What do you say?’

If it said now, ‘Don't go home!’ What a famous clock, hereafter, if it
said to-night of all the nights that it has counted off, to this old man
of all the young and old men who have ever stood before it, ‘Don't go
home!’ With its sharp clear bell it strikes three quarters after seven
and ticks on again. ‘Why, you are worse than I thought you,’ says Mr
Tulkinghorn, muttering reproof to his watch. ‘Two minutes wrong? At
this rate you won't last my time.’ What a watch to return good for evil
if it ticked in answer, ‘Don't go home!’

He passes out into the streets and walks on, with his hands behind
him, under the shadow of the lofty houses, many of whose mysteries,
difficulties, mortgages, delicate affairs of all kinds, are treasured up
within his old black satin waistcoat. He is in the confidence of the very
bricks and mortar. The high chimney-stacks telegraph family secrets
to him. Yet there is not a voice in a mile of them to whisper, ‘Don't go
home!’

Through the stir and motion of the commoner streets; through the
roar and jar of many vehicles, many feet, many voices; with the
blazing shop-lights lighting him on, the west wind blowing him on,
and the crowd pressing him on, he is pitilessly urged upon his way,
and nothing meets him murmuring, ‘Don't go home!’ Arrived at last in
his dull room to light his candles, and look round and up, and see the
Roman pointing from the ceiling, there is no new significance in the
Roman's hand to-night or in the flutter of the attendant groups to give
him the late warning, ‘Don't come here!’

It is a moonlight night, but the moon, being past the full, is only now
rising over the great wilderness of London. The stars are shining as
they shone above the turret-leads at Chesney Wold. This woman, as
he has of late been so accustomed to call her, looks out upon them.
Her soul is turbulent within her; she is sick at heart and restless. The
large rooms are too cramped and close. She cannot endure their
restraint and will walk alone in a neighbouring garden.

Too capricious and imperious in all she does to be the cause of much
surprise in those about her as to anything she does, this woman,
loosely muffled, goes out into the moonlight. Mercury attends with the
key. Having opened the garden-gate, he delivers the key into his
Lady's hands at her request and is bidden to go back. She will walk
there some time to ease her aching head. She may be an hour, she
may be more. She needs no further escort. The gate shuts upon its
spring with a clash, and he leaves her passing on into the dark shade
of some trees.

A fine night, and a bright large moon, and multitudes of stars. Mr
Tulkinghorn, in repairing to his cellar and in opening and shutting
those resounding doors, has to cross a little prison-like yard. He looks
up casually, thinking what a fine night, what a bright large moon,
what multitudes of stars! A quiet night, too.
A very quiet night. When the moon shines very brilliantly, a solitude
and stillness seem to proceed from her that influence even crowded
places full of life. Not only is it a still night on dusty high roads and on
hill-summits, whence a wide expanse of country may be seen in
repose, quieter and quieter as it spreads away into a fringe of trees
against the sky with the grey ghost of a bloom upon them; not only is
it a still night in gardens and in woods, and on the river where the
water-meadows are fresh and green, and the stream sparkles on
among pleasant islands, murmuring weirs, and whispering rushes;
not only does the stillness attend it as it flows where houses cluster
thick, where many bridges are reflected in it, where wharves and
shipping make it black and awful, where it winds from these
disfigurements through marshes whose grim beacons stand like
skeletons washed ashore, where it expands through the bolder region
of rising grounds, rich in cornfield wind-mill and steeple, and where it
mingles with the ever-heaving sea; not only is it a still night on the
deep, and on the shore where the watcher stands to see the ship with
her spread wings cross the path of light that appears to be presented
to only him; but even on this stranger's wilderness of London there is
some rest. Its steeples and towers and its one great dome grow more
ethereal; its smoky house-tops lose their grossness in the pale
effulgence; the noises that arise from the streets are fewer and are
softened, and the footsteps on the pavements pass more tranquilly
away. In these fields of Mr Tulkinghorn's inhabiting, where the
shepherds play on Chancery pipes that have no stop, and keep their
sheep in the fold by hook and by crook until they have shorn them
exceeding close, every noise is merged, this moonlight night, into a
distant ringing hum, as if the city were a vast glass, vibrating.

What's that? Who fired a gun or pistol? Where was it?

The few foot-passengers start, stop, and stare about them. Some
windows and doors are opened, and people come out to look. It was a
loud report and echoed and rattled heavily. It shook one house, or so
a man says who was passing. It has aroused all the dogs in the
neighbourhood, who bark vehemently. Terrified cats scamper across
the road. While the dogs are yet barking and howling--there is one dog
howling like a demon--the church-clocks, as if they were startled too,
begin to strike. The hum from the streets, likewise, seems to swell into
a shout. But it is soon over. Before the last clock begins to strike ten,
there is a lull. When it has ceased, the fine night, the bright large
moon, and multitudes of stars, are left at peace again.

Has Mr Tulkinghorn been disturbed? His windows are dark and quiet,
and his door is shut. It must be something unusual indeed to bring
him out of his shell. Nothing is heard of him, nothing is seen of him.
What power of cannon might it take to shake that rusty old man out
of his immovable composure?
For many years the persistent Roman has been pointing, with no
particular meaning, from that ceiling. It is not likely that he has any
new meaning in him to-night. Once pointing, always pointing--like any
Roman, or even Briton, with a single idea. There he is, no doubt, in
his impossible attitude, pointing, unavailingly, all night long.
Moonlight, darkness, dawn, sunrise, day. There he is still, eagerly
pointing, and no one minds him.

But a little after the coming of the day come people to clean the
rooms. And either the Roman has some new meaning in him, not
expressed before, or the foremost of them goes wild, for looking up at
his outstretched hand and looking down at what is below it, that
person shrieks and flies. The others, looking in as the first one looked,
shriek and fly too, and there is an alarm in the street.

What does it mean? No light is admitted into the darkened chamber,
and people unaccustomed to it enter, and treading softly but heavily,
carry a weight into the bedroom and lay it down. There is whispering
and wondering all day, strict search of every corner, careful tracing of
steps, and careful noting of the disposition of every article of furniture.
All eyes look up at the Roman, and all voices murmur, ‘Tf he could
only tell what he saw!’

He is pointing at a table with a bottle (nearly full of wine) and a glass
upon it and two candles that were blown out suddenly soon after
being lighted. He is pointing at an empty chair and at a stain upon the
ground before it that might be almost covered with a hand. These
objects lie directly within his range. An excited imagination might
suppose that there was something in them so terrific as to drive the
rest of the composition, not only the attendant big-legged boys, but
the clouds and flowers and pillars too--in short, the very body and
soul of Allegory, and all the brains it has--stark mad. It happens
surely that every one who comes into the darkened room and looks at
these things looks up at the Roman and that he is invested in all eyes
with mystery and awe, as if he were a paralysed dumb witness.

So it shall happen surely, through many years to come, that ghostly
stories shall be told of the stain upon the floor, so easy to be covered,
so hard to be got out, and that the Roman, pointing from the ceiling
shall point, so long as dust and damp and spiders spare him, with far
greater significance than he ever had in Mr Tulkinghorn's time, and
with a deadly meaning. For Mr Tulkinghorn's time is over for
evermore, and the Roman pointed at the murderous hand uplifted
against his life, and pointed helplessly at him, from night to morning,
lying face downward on the floor, shot through the heart.
CHAPTER XLIX - Dutiful Friendship

A great annual occasion has come round in the establishment of Mr
Matthew Bagnet, otherwise Lignum Vitae, ex-artilleryman and present
bassoon-player. An occasion of feasting and festival. The celebration of
a birthday in the family.

It is not Mr Bagnet's birthday. Mr Bagnet merely distinguishes that
epoch in the musical instrument business by kissing the children with
an extra smack before breakfast, smoking an additional pipe after
dinner, and wondering towards evening what his poor old mother is
thinking about it--a subject of infinite speculation, and rendered so by
his mother having departed this life twenty years. Some men rarely
revert to their father, but seem, in the bank-books of their
remembrance, to have transferred all the stock of filial affection into
their mother's name. Mr Bagnet is one of like his trade the better for
that. If I had kept clear of his old girl causes him usually to make the
noun- substantive ‘goodness’ of the feminine gender.

It is not the birthday of one of the three children. Those occasions are
kept with some marks of distinction, but they rarely overleap the
bounds of happy returns and a pudding. On young Woolwich's last
birthday, Mr Bagnet certainly did, after observing on his growth and
general advancement, proceed, in a moment of profound reflection on
the changes wrought by time, to examine him in the catechism,
accomplishing with extreme accuracy the questions number one and
two, ‘What is your name?’ and ‘Who gave you that name?’ but there
failing in the exact precision of his memory and substituting for
number three the question ‘And how do you like that name?’ which he
propounded with a sense of its importance, in itself so edifying and
improving as to give it quite an orthodox air. This, however, was a
speciality on that particular birthday, and not a general solemnity.

It is the old girl's birthday, and that is the greatest holiday and
reddest-letter day in Mr Bagnet's calendar. The auspicious event is
always commemorated according to certain forms settled and
prescribed by Mr Bagnet some years since. Mr Bagnet, being deeply
convinced that to have a pair of fowls for dinner is to attain the
highest pitch of imperial luxury, invariably goes forth himself very
early in the morning of this day to buy a pair; he is, as invariably,
taken in by the vendor and installed in the possession of the oldest
inhabitants of any coop in Europe. Returning with these triumphs of
toughness tied up in a clean blue and white cotton handkerchief
(essential to the arrangements), he in a casual manner invites Mrs
Bagnet to declare at breakfast what she would like for dinner. Mrs
Bagnet, by a coincidence never known to fail, replying fowls, Mr
Bagnet instantly produces his bundle from a place of concealment
amidst general amazement and rejoicing. He further requires that the
old girl shall do nothing all day long but sit in her very best gown and
be served by himself and the young people. As he is not illustrious for
his cookery, this may be supposed to be a matter of state rather than
enjoyment on the old girl's part, but she keeps her state with all
imaginable cheerfulness.

On this present birthday, Mr Bagnet has accomplished the usual
preliminaries. He has bought two specimens of poultry, which, if there
be any truth in adages, were certainly not caught with chaff, to be
prepared for the spit; he has amazed and rejoiced the family by their
unlooked-for production; he is himself directing the roasting of the
poultry; and Mrs Bagnet, with her wholesome brown fingers itching to
prevent what she sees going wrong, sits in her gown of ceremony, an
honoured guest.

Quebec and Malta lay the cloth for dinner, while Woolwich, serving, as
beseems him, under his father, keeps the fowls revolving. To these
young scullions Mrs Bagnet occasionally imparts a wink, or a shake of
the head, or a crooked face, as they made mistakes.

‘At half after one.’ Says Mr Bagnet. ‘To the minute. They'll be done.’

Mrs Bagnet, with anguish, beholds one of them at a standstill before
the fire and beginning to burn.

‘You shall have a dinner, old girl,’ says Mr Bagnet. ‘Fit for a queen.’

Mrs Bagnet shows her white teeth cheerfully, but to the perception of
her son, betrays so much uneasiness of spirit that he is impelled by
the dictates of affection to ask her, with his eyes, what is the matter,
thus standing, with his eyes wide open, more oblivious of the fowls
than before, and not affording the least hope of a return to
consciousness. Fortunately his elder sister perceives the cause of the
agitation in Mrs Bagnet's breast and with an admonitory poke recalls
him. The stopped fowls going round again, Mrs Bagnet closes her eyes
in the intensity of her relief.

‘George will look us up,’ says Mr Bagnet. ‘At half after four. To the
moment. How many years, old girl. Has George looked us up. This
afternoon?’

‘Ah, Lignum, Lignum, as many as make an old woman of a young one,
I begin to think. Just about that, and no less,’ returns Mrs Bagnet,
laughing and shaking her head.

‘Old girl,’ says Mr Bagnet, ‘never mind. You'd be as young as ever you
was. If you wasn't younger. Which you are. As everybody knows.’
Quebec and Malta here exclaim, with clapping of hands, that Bluffy is
sure to bring mother something, and begin to speculate on what it will
be.

‘Do you know, Lignum,’ says Mrs Bagnet, casting a glance on the
table-cloth, and winking ‘salt!’ at Malta with her right eye, and
shaking the pepper away from Quebec with her head, ‘I begin to think
George is in the roving way again.’

‘George,’ returns Mr Bagnet, ‘will never desert. And leave his old
comrade. In the lurch. Don't be afraid of it.’

‘No, Lignum. No. I don't say he will. I don't think he will. But if he
could get over this money trouble of his, I believe he would be off.’

Mr Bagnet asks why.

‘Well,’ returns his wife, considering, ‘George seems to me to be getting
not a little impatient and restless. I don't say but what he's as free as
ever. Of course he must be free or he wouldn't be George, but he
smarts and seems put out.’

‘He's extra-drilled,’ says Mr Bagnet. ‘By a lawyer. Who would put the
devil out.’

‘There's something in that,’ his wife assents; ‘but so it is, Lignum.’

Further conversation is prevented, for the time, by the necessity under
which Mr Bagnet finds himself of directing the whole force of his mind
to the dinner, which is a little endangered by the dry humour of the
fowls in not yielding any gravy, and also by the made gravy acquiring
no flavour and turning out of a flaxen complexion. With a similar
perverseness, the potatoes crumble off forks in the process of peeling,
upheaving from their centres in every direction, as if they were subject
to earthquakes. The legs of the fowls, too, are longer than could be
desired, and extremely scaly. Overcoming these disadvantages to the
best of his ability, Mr Bagnet at last dishes and they sit down at table,
Mrs Bagnet occupying the guest's place at his right hand.

It is well for the old girl that she has but one birthday in a year, for
two such indulgences in poultry might be injurious. Every kind of
finer tendon and ligament that is in the nature of poultry to possess is
developed in these specimens in the singular form of guitar-strings.
Their limbs appear to have struck roots into their breasts and bodies,
as aged trees strike roots into the earth. Their legs are so hard as to
encourage the idea that they must have devoted the greater part of
their long and arduous lives to pedestrian exercises and the walking of
matches. But Mr Bagnet, unconscious of these little defects, sets his
heart on Mrs Bagnet eating a most severe quantity of the delicacies
before her; and as that good old girl would not cause him a moment's
disappointment on any day, least of all on such a day, for any
consideration, she imperils her digestion fearfully. How young
Woolwich cleans the drum-sticks without being of ostrich descent, his
anxious mother is at a loss to understand.

The old girl has another trial to undergo after the conclusion of the
repast in sitting in state to see the room cleared, the hearth swept,
and the dinner-service washed up and polished in the backyard. The
great delight and energy with which the two young ladies apply
themselves to these duties, turning up their skirts in imitation of their
mother and skating in and out on little scaffolds of pattens, inspire
the highest hopes for the future, but some anxiety for the present. The
same causes lead to confusion of tongues, a clattering of crockery, a
rattling of tin mugs, a whisking of brooms, and an expenditure of
water, all in excess, while the saturation of the young ladies
themselves is almost too moving a spectacle for Mrs Bagnet to look
upon with the calmness proper to her position. At last the various
cleansing processes are triumphantly completed; Quebec and Malta
appear in fresh attire, smiling and dry; pipes, tobacco, and something
to drink are placed upon the table; and the old girl enjoys the first
peace of mind she ever knows on the day of this delightful
entertainment.

When Mr Bagnet takes his usual seat, the hands of the clock are very
near to half-past four; as they mark it accurately, Mr Bagnet
announces, ‘George! Military time.’

It is George, and he has hearty congratulations for the old girl (whom
he kisses on the great occasion), and for the children, and for Mr
Bagnet. ‘Happy returns to all!’ says Mr George.

‘But, George, old man!’ cries Mrs Bagnet, looking at him curiously.
‘What's come to you?’

‘Come to me?’

‘Ah! You are so white, George--for you--and look so shocked. Now
don't he, Lignum?’

‘George,’ says Mr Bagnet, ‘tell the old girl. What's the matter.’

T didn't know I looked white,’ says the trooper, passing his hand over
his brow, ‘and I didn't know I looked shocked, and I'm sorry I do. But
the truth is, that boy who was taken in at my place died yesterday
afternoon, and it has rather knocked me over.’
‘Poor creetur!’ says Mrs Bagnet with a mother's pity. Is he gone? Dear,
dear!’

T didn't mean to say anything about it, for it's not birthday talk, but
you have got it out of me, you see, before I sit down. I should have
roused up in a minute,’ says the trooper, making himself speak more
gaily, ‘but you're so quick, Mrs Bagnet.’

‘You're right. The old girl,’ says Mr Bagnet. Is as quick. As powder.’

‘And what's more, she's the subject of the day, and we'll stick to her,’
cries Mr George. ‘See here, I have brought a little brooch along with
me. It's a poor thing, you know, but it's a keepsake. That's all the good
it is, Mrs Bagnet.’

Mr George produces his present, which is greeted with admiring
leapings and clappings by the young family, and with a species of
reverential admiration by Mr Bagnet. ‘Old girl,’ says Mr Bagnet. ‘Tell
him my opinion of it.’

‘Why, it's a wonder, George!’ Mrs Bagnet exclaims. it's the
beautifullest thing that ever was seen!’

‘Good!’ says Mr Bagnet. ‘My opinion.’

It's so pretty, George,’ cries Mrs Bagnet, turning it on all sides and
holding it out at arm's length, ‘that it seems too choice for me.’

‘Bad!’ says Mr Bagnet. ‘Not my opinion.’

‘But whatever it is, a hundred thousand thanks, old fellow,’ says Mrs
Bagnet, her eyes sparkling with pleasure and her hand stretched out
to him; ‘and though I have been a crossgrained soldier's wife to you
sometimes, George, we are as strong friends, I am sure, in reality, as
ever can be. Now you shall fasten it on yourself, for good luck, if you
will, George.’

The children close up to see it done, and Mr Bagnet looks over young
Woolwich's head to see it done with an interest so maturely wooden,
yet pleasantly childish, that Mrs Bagnet cannot help laughing in her
airy way and saying, ‘Oh, Lignum, Lignum, what a precious old chap
you are!’ But the trooper fails to fasten the brooch. His hand shakes,
he is nervous, and it falls off. ‘Would any one believe this?’ says he,
catching it as it drops and looking round. I am so out of sorts that I
bungle at an easy job like this!’

Mrs Bagnet concludes that for such a case there is no remedy like a
pipe, and fastening the brooch herself in a twinkling, causes the
trooper to be inducted into his usual snug place and the pipes to be
got into action. Tf that don't bring you round, George,’ says she, just
throw your eye across here at your present now and then, and the two
together MUST do it.’

‘You ought to do it of yourself,’ George answers; ‘I know that very well,
Mrs Bagnet. I'll tell you how, one way and another, the blues have got
to be too many for me. Here was this poor lad. 'Twas dull work to see
him dying as he did, and not be able to help him.’

‘What do you mean, George? You did help him. You took him under
your roof.’

T helped him so far, but that's little. I mean, Mrs Bagnet, there he
was, dying without ever having been taught much more than to know
his right hand from his left. And he was too far gone to be helped out
of that.’

‘Ah, poor creetur!’ says Mrs Bagnet.

‘Then,’ says the trooper, not yet lighting his pipe, and passing his
heavy hand over his hair, ‘that brought up Gridley in a man's mind.
His was a bad case too, in a different way. Then the two got mixed up
in a man's mind with a flinty old rascal who had to do with both. And
to think of that rusty carbine, stock and barrel, standing up on end in
his corner, hard, indifferent, taking everything so evenly--it made flesh
and blood tingle, I do assure you.’

‘My advice to you,’ returns Mrs Bagnet, ‘is to light your pipe and tingle
that way. It's wholesomer and comfortabler, and better for the health
altogether.’

‘You're right,’ says the trooper, ‘and I'll do it.’

So he does it, though still with an indignant gravity that impresses the
young Bagnets, and even causes Mr Bagnet to defer the ceremony of
drinking Mrs Bagnet's health, always given by himself on these
occasions in a speech of exemplary terseness. But the young ladies
having composed what Mr Bagnet is in the habit of calling ‘the
mixtur,’ and George's pipe being now in a glow, Mr Bagnet considers it
his duty to proceed to the toast of the evening. He addresses the
assembled company in the following terms.

‘George. Woolwich. Quebec. Malta. This is her birthday. Take a day's
march. And you won't find such another. Here's towards her!’

The toast having been drunk with enthusiasm, Mrs Bagnet returns
thanks in a neat address of corresponding brevity. This model
composition is limited to the three words ‘And wishing yours!’ which
the old girl follows up with a nod at everybody in succession and a
well-regulated swig of the mixture. This she again follows up, on the
present occasion, by the wholly unexpected exclamation, ‘Here's a
man!’

Here IS a man, much to the astonishment of the little company,
looking in at the parlour-door. He is a sharp-eyed man--a quick keen
man--and he takes in everybody's look at him, all at once, individually
and collectively, in a manner that stamps him a remarkable man.

‘George,’ says the man, nodding, ‘how do you find yourself?’
‘Why, it's Bucket!’ cries Mr George.

‘Yes,’ says the man, coming in and closing the door. I was going down
the street here when I happened to stop and look in at the musical
instruments in the shop-window--a friend of mine is in want of a
second-hand wiolinceller of a good tone--and I saw a party enjoying
themselves, and I thought it was you in the corner; I thought I
couldn't be mistaken. How goes the world with you, George, at the
present moment? Pretty smooth? And with you, ma'am? And with you,
governor? And Lord,’ says Mr Bucket, opening his arms, ‘here's
children too! You may do anything with me if you only show me
children. Give us a kiss, my pets. No occasion to inquire who YOUR
father and mother is. Never saw such a likeness in my life!’

Mr Bucket, not unwelcome, has sat himself down next to Mr George
and taken Quebec and Malta on his knees. ‘You pretty dears,’ says Mr
Bucket, ‘give us another kiss; it's the only thing I'm greedy in. Lord
bless you, how healthy you look! And what may be the ages of these
two, ma'am? I should put 'em down at the figures of about eight and
ten.’

‘You're very near, sir,’ says Mrs Bagnet.

T generally am near,’ returns Mr Bucket, ‘being so fond of children. A
friend of mine has had nineteen of 'em, ma'am, all by one mother, and
she's still as fresh and rosy as the morning. Not so much so as
yourself, but, upon my soul, she comes near you! And what do you
call these, my darling?’ pursues Mr Bucket, pinching Malta's cheeks.
‘These are peaches, these are. Bless your heart! And what do you
think about father? Do you think father could recommend a second-
hand wiolinceller of a good tone for Mr Bucket's friend, my dear? My
name's Bucket. Ain't that a funny name?’

These blandishments have entirely won the family heart. Mrs Bagnet
forgets the day to the extent of filling a pipe and a glass for Mr Bucket
and waiting upon him hospitably. She would be glad to receive so
pleasant a character under any circumstances, but she tells him that
as a friend of George's she is particularly glad to see him this evening,
for George has not been in his usual spirits.

‘Not in his usual spirits?’ exclaims Mr Bucket. ‘Why, I never heard of
such a thing! What's the matter, George? You don't intend to tell me
you've been out of spirits. What should you be out of spirits for? You
haven't got anything on your mind, you know.’

‘Nothing particular,’ returns the trooper.

T should think not,’ rejoins Mr Bucket. ‘What could you have on your
mind, you know! And have these pets got anything on THEIR minds,
eh? Not they, but they'll be upon the minds of some of the young
fellows, some of these days, and make 'em precious low- spirited. I
ain't much of a prophet, but I can tell you that, ma'am.’

Mrs Bagnet, quite charmed, hopes Mr Bucket has a family of his own.

‘There, ma'am!’ says Mr Bucket. ‘Would you believe it? No, I haven't.
My wife and a lodger constitute my family. Mrs Bucket is as fond of
children as myself and as wishful to have 'em, but no. So it is. Worldly
goods are divided unequally, and man must not repine. What a very
nice backyard, ma'am! Any way out of that yard, now?’

There is no way out of that yard.

‘Ain't there really?’ says Mr Bucket. IT should have thought there
might have been. Well, I don't know as I ever saw a backyard that took
my fancy more. Would you allow me to look at it? Thank you. No, I see
there's no way out. But what a very good- proportioned yard it is!’

Having cast his sharp eye all about it, Mr Bucket returns to his chair
next his friend Mr George and pats Mr George affectionately on the
shoulder.

‘How are your spirits now, George?’
‘All right now,’ returns the trooper.

‘That's your sort!’ says Mr Bucket. ‘Why should you ever have been
otherwise? A man of your fine figure and constitution has no right to
be out of spirits. That ain't a chest to be out of spirits, is it, ma'am?
And you haven't got anything on your mind, you know, George; what
could you have on your mind!’
Somewhat harping on this phrase, considering the extent and variety
of his conversational powers, Mr Bucket twice or thrice repeats it to
the pipe he lights, and with a listening face that is particularly his
own. But the sun of his sociality soon recovers from this brief eclipse
and shines again.

‘And this is brother, is it, my dears?’ says Mr Bucket, referring to
Quebec and Malta for information on the subject of young Woolwich.
‘And a nice brother he is--half-brother I mean to say. For he's too old
to be your boy, ma'am.’

T can certify at all events that he is not anybody else's,’ returns Mrs
Bagnet, laughing.

‘Well, you do surprise me! Yet he's like you, there's no denying. Lord,
he's wonderfully like you! But about what you may call the brow, you
know, THERE his father comes out!’ Mr Bucket compares the faces
with one eye shut up, while Mr Bagnet smokes in stolid satisfaction.

This is an opportunity for Mrs Bagnet to inform him that the boy is
George's godson.

‘George's godson, is he?’ rejoins Mr Bucket with extreme cordiality. 1
must shake hands over again with George's godson. Godfather and
godson do credit to one another. And what do you intend to make of
him, ma'am? Does he show any turn for any musical instrument?’

Mr Bagnet suddenly interposes, ‘Plays the fife. Beautiful.’

‘Would you believe it, governor,’ says Mr Bucket, struck by the
coincidence, ‘that when I was a boy I played the fife myself? Not in a
scientific way, as I expect he does, but by ear. Lord bless you! 'British
Grenadiers'--there's a tune to warm an Englishman up! COULD you
give us 'British Grenadiers,' my fine fellow?’

Nothing could be more acceptable to the little circle than this call
upon young Woolwich, who immediately fetches his fife and performs
the stirring melody, during which performance Mr Bucket, much
enlivened, beats time and never falls to come in sharp with the
burden, British Gra-a-anadeers!’ In short, he shows so much musical
taste that Mr Bagnet actually takes his pipe from his lips to express
his conviction that he is a singer. Mr Bucket receives the harmonious
impeachment so modestly, confessing how that he did once chaunt a
little, for the expression of the feelings of his own bosom, and with no
presumptuous idea of entertaining his friends, that he is asked to
sing. Not to be behindhand in the sociality of the evening, he complies
and gives them ‘Believe Me, if All Those Endearing Young Charms.’
This ballad, he informs Mrs Bagnet, he considers to have been his
most powerful ally in moving the heart of Mrs Bucket when a maiden,
and inducing her to approach the altar--Mr Bucket's own words are
‘to come up to the scratch.’

This sparkling stranger is such a new and agreeable feature in the
evening that Mr George, who testified no great emotions of pleasure on
his entrance, begins, in spite of himself, to be rather proud of him. He
is so friendly, is a man of so many resources, and so easy to get on
with, that it is something to have made him known there. Mr Bagnet
becomes, after another pipe, so sensible of the value of his
acquaintance that he solicits the honour of his company on the old
girl's next birthday. If anything can more closely cement and
consolidate the esteem which Mr Bucket has formed for the family, it
is the discovery of the nature of the occasion. He drinks to Mrs Bagnet
with a warmth approaching to rapture, engages himself for that day
twelvemonth more than thankfully, makes a memorandum of the day
in a large black pocket- book with a girdle to it, and breathes a hope
that Mrs Bucket and Mrs Bagnet may before then become, in a
manner, sisters. As he says himself, what is public life without private
ties? He is in his humble way a public man, but it is not in that
sphere that he finds happiness. No, it must be sought within the
confines of domestic bliss.

It is natural, under these circumstances, that he, in his turn, should
remember the friend to whom he is indebted for so promising an
acquaintance. And he does. He keeps very close to him. Whatever the
subject of the conversation, he keeps a tender eye upon him. He waits
to walk home with him. He is interested in his very boots and observes
even them attentively as Mr George sits smoking cross-legged in the
chimney-corner.

At length Mr George rises to depart. At the same moment Mr Bucket,
with the secret sympathy of friendship, also rises. He dotes upon the
children to the last and remembers the commission he has
undertaken for an absent friend.

‘Respecting that second-hand _ wiolinceller, governor--could you
recommend me such a thing?’

‘Scores,’ says Mr Bagnet.

T am obliged to you,’ returns Mr Bucket, squeezing his hand. ‘You're a
friend in need. A good tone, mind you! My friend is a regular dab at it.
Ecod, he saws away at Mozart and Handel and the rest of the big-wigs
like a thorough workman. And you needn't,’ says Mr Bucket in a
considerate and private voice, ‘you needn't commit yourself to too low
a figure, governor. I don't want to pay too large a price for my friend,
but I want you to have your proper percentage and be remunerated for
your loss of time. That is but fair. Every man must live, and ought to
it.’

Mr Bagnet shakes his head at the old girl to the effect that they have
found a jewel of price.

‘Suppose I was to give you a look in, say, at half arter ten to- morrow
morning. Perhaps you could name the figures of a few wiolincellers of
a good tone?’ says Mr Bucket.

Nothing easier. Mr and Mrs Bagnet both engage to have the requisite
information ready and even hint to each other at the practicability of
having a small stock collected there for approval.

‘Thank you,’ says Mr Bucket, ‘thank you. Good night, ma'am. Good
night, governor. Good night, darlings. I am much obliged to you for
one of the pleasantest evenings I ever spent in my life.’

They, on the contrary, are much obliged to him for the pleasure he
has given them in his company; and so they part with many
expressions of goodwill on both sides. ‘Now George, old boy,’ says Mr
Bucket, taking his arm at the shop-door, ‘come along!’ As they go
down the little street and the Bagnets pause for a minute looking after
them, Mrs Bagnet remarks to the worthy Lignum that Mr Bucket
‘almost clings to George like, and seems to be really fond of him.’

The neighbouring streets being narrow and ill-paved, it is a little
inconvenient to walk there two abreast and arm in arm. Mr George
therefore soon proposes to walk singly. But Mr Bucket, who cannot
make up his mind to relinquish his friendly hold, replies, ‘Wait half a
minute, George. I should wish to speak to you first.’ Immediately
afterwards, he twists him into a public-house and into a parlour,
where he confronts him and claps his own back against the door.

‘Now, George,’ says Mr Bucket, ‘duty is duty, and friendship is
friendship. I never want the two to clash if I can help it. I have
endeavoured to make things pleasant to-night, and I put it to you
whether I have done it or not. You must consider yourself in custody,
George.’

‘Custody? What for?’ returns the trooper, thunderstruck.

‘Now, George,’ says Mr Bucket, urging a sensible view of the case upon
him with his fat forefinger, ‘duty, as you know very well, is one thing,
and conversation is another. It's my duty to inform you that any
observations you may make will be liable to be used against you.
Therefore, George, be careful what you say. You don't happen to have
heard of a murder?’
Murder!’

‘Now, George,’ says Mr Bucket, keeping his forefinger in an impressive
state of action, ‘bear in mind what I've said to you. I ask you nothing.
You've been in low spirits this afternoon. I say, you don't happen to
have heard of a murder?’

No. Where has there been a murder?’

‘Now, George,’ says Mr Bucket, ‘don't you go and commit yourself. I'm
a-going to tell you what I want you for. There has been a murder in
Lincoln's Inn Fields--gentleman of the name of Tulkinghorn. He was
shot last night. I want you for that.’

The trooper sinks upon a seat behind him, and great drops start out
upon his forehead, and a deadly pallor overspreads his face.

‘Bucket! It's not possible that Mr Tulkinghorn has been killed and that
you suspect ME?’

‘George,’ returns Mr Bucket, keeping his forefinger going, ‘it is
certainly possible, because it's the case. This deed was done last night
at ten o'clock. Now, you know where you were last night at ten o'clock,
and you'll be able to prove it, no doubt.’

‘Last night! Last night?’ repeats the trooper thoughtfully. Then it
flashes upon him. ‘Why, great heaven, I was there last night!’

‘So I have understood, George,’ returns Mr Bucket with great
deliberation. ‘So I have understood. Likewise you've been very often
there. You've been seen hanging about the place, and you've been
heard more than once in a wrangle with him, and it's possible --I don't
say it's certainly so, mind you, but it's possible--that he may have
been heard to call you a threatening, murdering, dangerous fellow.’

The trooper gasps as if he would admit it all if he could speak.

‘Now, George,’ continues Mr Bucket, putting his hat upon the table
with an air of business rather in the upholstery way than otherwise,
‘my wish is, as it has been all the evening, to make things pleasant. I
tell you plainly there's a reward out, of a hundred guineas, offered by
Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet. You and me have always been
pleasant together; but I have got a duty to discharge; and if that
hundred guineas is to be made, it may as well be made by me as any
other man. On all of which accounts, I should hope it was clear to you
that I must have you, and that I'm damned if I don't have you. Am I to
call in any assistance, or is the trick done?’
Mr George has recovered himself and stands up like a soldier. ‘Come,’
he says; I am ready.’

‘George,’ continues Mr Bucket, ‘wait a bit!’ With his upholsterer
manner, as if the trooper were a window to be fitted up, he takes from
his pocket a pair of handcuffs. ‘This is a serious charge, George, and
such is my duty.’

The trooper flushes angrily and hesitates a moment, but holds out his
two hands, clasped together, and says, ‘There! Put them on!’

Mr Bucket adjusts them in a moment. ‘How do you find them? Are
they comfortable? If not, say so, for I wish to make things as pleasant
as is consistent with my duty, and I've got another pair in my pocket.’
This remark he offers like a most respectable tradesman anxious to
execute an order neatly and to the perfect satisfaction of his customer.
‘They'll do as they are? Very well! Now, you see, George’--he takes a
cloak from a corner and begins adjusting it about the trooper's neck--
Twas mindful of your feelings when I come out, and brought this on
purpose. There! Who's the wiser?’

‘Only I,’ returns the trooper, ‘but as I know it, do me one more good
turn and pull my hat over my eyes.’

‘Really, though! Do you mean it? Ain't it a pity? It looks so.’

T can't look chance men in the face with these things on,’ Mr George
hurriedly replies. ‘Do, for God's sake, pull my hat forward.’

So strongly entreated, Mr Bucket complies, puts his own hat on, and
conducts his prize into the streets, the trooper marching on as
steadily as usual, though with his head less erect, and Mr Bucket
steering him with his elbow over the crossings and up the turnings.
CHAPTER L - Esther's Narrative

It happened that when I came home from Deal I found a note from
Caddy Jellyby (as we always continued to call her), informing me that
her health, which had been for some time very delicate, was worse
and that she would be more glad than she could tell me if I would go
to see her. It was a note of a few lines, written from the couch on
which she lay and enclosed to me in another from her husband, in
which he seconded her entreaty with much solicitude. Caddy was now
the mother, and I the godmother, of such a poor little baby--such a
tiny old-faced mite, with a countenance that seemed to be scarcely
anything but cap-border, and a little lean, long-fingered hand, always
clenched under its chin. It would lie in this attitude all day, with its
bright specks of eyes open, wondering (as I used to imagine) how it
came to be so small and weak. Whenever it was moved it cried, but at
all other times it was so patient that the sole desire of its life appeared
to be to lie quiet and think. It had curious little dark veins in its face
and curious little dark marks under its eyes like faint remembrances
of poor Caddy's inky days, and altogether, to those who were not used
to it, it was quite a piteous little sight.

But it was enough for Caddy that SHE was used to it. The projects
with which she beguiled her illness, for little Esther's education, and
little Esther's marriage, and even for her own old age as the
grandmother of little Esther's little Esthers, was so prettily expressive
of devotion to this pride of her life that I should be tempted to recall
some of them but for the timely remembrance that I am getting on
irregularly as it is.

To return to the letter. Caddy had a superstition about me which had
been strengthening in her mind ever since that night long ago when
she had lain asleep with her head in my lap. She almost--I think I
must say quite--believed that I did her good whenever I was near her.
Now although this was such a fancy of the affectionate girl's that Iam
almost ashamed to mention it, still it might have all the force of a fact
when she was really ill. Therefore I set off to Caddy, with my
guardian's consent, post-haste; and she and Prince made so much of
me that there never was anything like it.

Next day I went again to sit with her, and next day I went again. It was
a very easy journey, for I had only to rise a little earlier in the
morning, and keep my accounts, and attend to housekeeping matters
before leaving home.

But when I had made these three visits, my guardian said to me, on
my return at night, ‘Now, little woman, little woman, this will never
do. Constant dropping will wear away a stone, and constant coaching
will wear out a Dame Durden. We will go to London for a while and
take possession of our old lodgings.’

‘Not for me, dear guardian,’ said I, ‘for I never feel tired,’ which was
strictly true. I was only too happy to be in such request.

‘For me then,’ returned my guardian, ‘or for Ada, or for both of us. It is
somebody's birthday to-morrow, I think.’

Truly I think it is,’ said I, kissing my darling, who would be twenty-
one to-morrow.

‘Well,’ observed my guardian, half pleasantly, half seriously, ‘that's a
great occasion and will give my fair cousin some necessary business
to transact in assertion of her independence, and will make London a
more convenient place for all of us. So to London we will go. That
being settled, there is another thing--how have you left Caddy?’

Very unwell, guardian. I fear it will be some time before she regains
her health and strength.’

‘What do you call some time, now?’ asked my guardian thoughtfully.
‘Some weeks, I am afraid.’

‘Ah!’ He began to walk about the room with his hands in his pockets,
showing that he had been thinking as much. ‘Now, what do you say
about her doctor? Is he a good doctor, my love?’

I felt obliged to confess that I knew nothing to the contrary but that
Prince and I had agreed only that evening that we would like his
opinion to be confirmed by some one.

‘Well, you know,’ returned my guardian quickly, ‘there's Woodcourt.’

I had not meant that, and was rather taken by surprise. For a
moment all that I had had in my mind in connexion with Mr
Woodcourt seemed to come back and confuse me.

‘You don't object to him, little woman?’

‘Object to him, guardian? Oh no!’

‘And you don't think the patient would object to him?’

So far from that, I had no doubt of her being prepared to have a great
reliance on him and to like him very much. I said that he was no
stranger to her personally, for she had seen him often in his kind
attendance on Miss Flite.

‘Very good,’ said my guardian. ‘He has been here to-day, my dear, and
I will see him about it to-morrow.’

I felt in this short conversation--though I did not know how, for she
was quiet, and we interchanged no look--that my dear girl well
remembered how merrily she had clasped me round the waist when
no other hands than Caddy's had brought me the little parting token.
This caused me to feel that I ought to tell her, and Caddy too, that I
was going to be the mistress of Bleak House and that if I avoided that
disclosure any longer I might become less worthy in my own eyes of
its master's love. Therefore, when we went upstairs and had waited
listening until the clock struck twelve in order that only I might be the
first to wish my darling all good wishes on her birthday and to take
her to my heart, I set before her, just as I had set before myself, the
goodness and honour of her cousin John and the happy life that was
in store for for me. If ever my darling were fonder of me at one time
than another in all our intercourse, she was surely fondest of me that
night. And I was so rejoiced to know it and so comforted by the sense
of having done right in casting this last idle reservation away that I
was ten times happier than I had been before. I had scarcely thought
it a reservation a few hours ago, but now that it was gone I felt as if I
understood its nature better.

Next day we went to London. We found our old lodging vacant, and in
half an hour were quietly established there, as if we had never gone
away. Mr Woodcourt dined with us to celebrate my darling's birthday,
and we were as pleasant as we could be with the great blank among
us that Richard's absence naturally made on such an occasion. After
that day I was for some weeks--eight or nine as I remember--very
much with Caddy, and thus it fell out that I saw less of Ada at this
time than any other since we had first come together, except the time
of my own illness. She often came to Caddy's, but our function there
was to amuse and cheer her, and we did not talk in our usual
confidential manner. Whenever I went home at night we were together,
but Caddy's rest was broken by pain, and I often remained to nurse
her.

With her husband and her poor little mite of a baby to love and their
home to strive for, what a good creature Caddy was! So self- denying,
so uncomplaining, so anxious to get well on their account, so afraid of
giving trouble, and so thoughtful of the unassisted labours of her
husband and the comforts of old Mr Turveydrop; I had never known
the best of her until now. And it seemed so curious that her pale face
and helpless figure should be lying there day after day where dancing
was the business of life, where the kit and the apprentices began early
every morning in the ball- room, and where the untidy little boy
waltzed by himself in the kitchen all the afternoon.

At Caddy's request I took the supreme direction of her apartment,
trimmed it up, and pushed her, couch and all, into a lighter and more
airy and more cheerful corner than she had yet occupied; then, every
day, when we were in our neatest array, I used to lay my small small
namesake in her arms and sit down to chat or work or read to her. It
was at one of the first of these quiet times that I told Caddy about
Bleak House.

We had other visitors besides Ada. First of all we had Prince, who in
his hurried intervals of teaching used to come softly in and sit softly
down, with a face of loving anxiety for Caddy and the very little child.
Whatever Caddy's condition really was, she never failed to declare to
Prince that she was all but well--which I, heaven forgive me, never
failed to confirm. This would put Prince in such good spirits that he
would sometimes take the kit from his pocket and play a chord or two
to astonish the baby, which I never knew it to do in the least degree,
for my tiny namesake never noticed it at all.

Then there was Mrs Jellyby. She would come occasionally, with her
usual distraught manner, and sit calmly looking miles beyond her
grandchild as if her attention were absorbed by a young Borrioboolan
on its native shores. As bright-eyed as ever, as serene, and as untidy,
she would say, ‘Well, Caddy, child, and how do you do to-day?’ And
then would sit amiably smiling and taking no notice of the reply or
would sweetly glide off into a calculation of the number of letters she
had lately received and answered or of the coffee-bearing power of
Borrioboola-Gha. This she would always do with a serene contempt
for our limited sphere of action, not to be disguised.

Then there was old Mr Turveydrop, who was from morning to night
and from night to morning the subject of innumerable precautions. If
the baby cried, it was nearly stifled lest the noise should make him
uncomfortable. If the fire wanted stirring in the night, it was
surreptitiously done lest his rest should be broken. If Caddy required
any little comfort that the house contained, she first carefully
discussed whether he was likely to require it too. In return for this
consideration he would come into the room once a day, all but
blessing it--showing a condescension, and a patronage, and a grace of
manner in dispensing the light of his high- shouldered presence from
which I might have supposed him (if I had not known better) to have
been the benefactor of Caddy's life.

‘My Caroline,’ he would say, making the nearest approach that he
could to bending over her. ‘Tell me that you are better to-day.’
‘Oh, much better, thank you, Mr Turveydrop,’ Caddy would reply.

‘Delighted! Enchanted! And our dear Miss Summerson. She is not
quite prostrated by fatigue?’ Here he would crease up his eyelids and
kiss his fingers to me, though I am happy to say he had ceased to be
particular in his attentions since I had been so altered.

Not at all,’ I would assure him.

‘Charming! We must take care of our dear Caroline, Miss Summerson.
We must spare nothing that will restore her. We must nourish her. My
dear Caroline’--he would turn to his daughter-in-law with infinite
generosity and protection--’want for nothing, my love. Frame a wish
and gratify it, my daughter. Everything this house contains,
everything my room contains, is at your service, my dear. Do not,’ he
would sometimes add in a burst of deportment, ‘even allow my simple
requirements to be considered if they should at any time interfere with
your own, my Caroline. Your necessities are greater than mine.’

He had established such a long prescriptive right to this deportment
(his son's inheritance from his mother) that I several times knew both
Caddy and her husband to be melted to tears by these affectionate
self-sacrifices.

‘Nay, my dears,’ he would remonstrate; and when I saw Caddy's thin
arm about his fat neck as he said it, I would be melted too, though not
by the same process. ‘Nay, nay! I have promised never to leave ye. Be
dutiful and affectionate towards me, and I ask no other return. Now,
bless ye! Iam going to the Park.’

He would take the air there presently and get an appetite for his hotel
dinner. I hope I do old Mr Turveydrop no wrong, but I never saw any
better traits in him than these I faithfully record, except that he
certainly conceived a liking for Peepy and would take the child out
walking with great pomp, always on those occasions sending him
home before he went to dinner himself, and occasionally with a
halfpenny in his pocket. But even this disinterestedness was attended
with no inconsiderable cost, to my knowledge, for before Peepy was
sufficiently decorated to walk hand in hand with the professor of
deportment, he had to be newly dressed, at the expense of Caddy and
her husband, from top to toe.

Last of our visitors, there was Mr Jellyby. Really when he used to
come in of an evening, and ask Caddy in his meek voice how she was,
and then sit down with his head against the wall, and make no
attempt to say anything more, I liked him very much. If he found me
bustling about doing any little thing, he sometimes half took his coat
off, as if with an intention of helping by a great exertion; but he never
got any further. His sole occupation was to sit with his head against
the wall, looking hard at the thoughtful baby; and I could not quite
divest my mind of a fancy that they understood one another.

I have not counted Mr Woodcourt among our visitors because he was
now Caddy's regular attendant. She soon began to improve under his
care, but he was so gentle, so skilful, so unwearying in the pains he
took that it is not to be wondered at, I am sure. I saw a good deal of
Mr Woodcourt during this time, though not so much as might be
supposed, for knowing Caddy to be safe in his hands, I often slipped
home at about the hours when he was expected. We frequently met,
notwithstanding. I was quite reconciled to myself now, but I still felt
glad to think that he was sorry for me, and he still WAS sorry for me I
believed. He helped Mr Badger in his professional engagements, which
were numerous, and had as yet no settled projects for the future.

It was when Caddy began to recover that I began to notice a change in
my dear girl. I cannot say how it first presented itself to me, because I
observed it in many slight particulars which were nothing in
themselves and only became something when they were pieced
together. But I made it out, by putting them together, that Ada was
not so frankly cheerful with me as she used to be. Her tenderness for
me was as loving and true as ever; I did not for a moment doubt that;
but there was a quiet sorrow about her which she did not confide to
me, and in which I traced some hidden regret.

Now, I could not understand this, and I was so anxious for the
happiness of my own pet that it caused me some uneasiness and set
me thinking often. At length, feeling sure that Ada suppressed this
something from me lest it should make me unhappy too, it came into
my head that she was a little grieved--for me--by what I had told her
about Bleak House.

How I persuaded myself that this was likely, I don't know. I had no
idea that there was any selfish reference in my doing so. I was not
grieved for myself: I was quite contented and quite happy. Still, that
Ada might be thinking--for me, though I had abandoned all such
thoughts--of what once was, but was now all changed, seemed so easy
to believe that I believed it.

What could I do to reassure my darling (I considered then) and show
her that I had no such feelings? Well! I could only be as brisk and
busy as possible, and that I had tried to be all along. However, as
Caddy's illness had certainly interfered, more or less, with my home
duties--though I had always been there in the morning to make my
guardian's breakfast, and he had a hundred times laughed and said
there must be two little women, for his little woman was never
missing--I resolved to be doubly diligent and gay. So I went about the
house humming all the tunes I knew, and I sat working and working
in a desperate manner, and I talked and talked, morning, noon, and
night.

And still there was the same shade between me and my darling.

‘So, Dame Trot,’ observed my guardian, shutting up his book one
night when we were all three together, ‘so Woodcourt has restored
Caddy Jellyby to the full enjoyment of life again?’

‘Yes,’ I said; ‘and to be repaid by such gratitude as hers is to be made
rich, guardian.’

T wish it was,’ he returned, ‘with all my heart.’
So did I too, for that matter. I said so.

‘Aye! We would make him as rich as a Jew if we knew how. Would we
not, little woman?’

I laughed as I worked and replied that I was not sure about that, for it
might spoil him, and he might not be so useful, and there might be
many who could ill spare him. As Miss Flite, and Caddy herself, and
many others.

‘True,’ said my guardian. ‘I had forgotten that. But we would agree to
make him rich enough to live, I suppose? Rich enough to work with
tolerable peace of mind? Rich enough to have his own happy home
and his own household gods--and household goddess, too, perhaps?’

That was quite another thing, I said. We must all agree in that.

‘To be sure,’ said my guardian. ‘All of us. I have a great regard for
Woodcourt, a high esteem for him; and I have been sounding him
delicately about his plans. It is difficult to offer aid to an independent
man with that just kind of pride which he possesses. And yet I would
be glad to do it if I might or if I knew how. He seems half inclined for
another voyage. But that appears like casting such a man away.’

Tt might open a new world to him,’ said I.

‘So it might, little woman,’ my guardian assented. I doubt if he
expects much of the old world. Do you know I have fancied that he
sometimes feels some particular disappointment or misfortune

encountered in it. You never heard of anything of that sort?’

I shook my head.
‘Humph,’ said my guardian. I am mistaken, I dare say.’ As there was
a little pause here, which I thought, for my dear girl's satisfaction, had
better be filled up, I hummed an air as I worked which was a favourite
with my guardian.

‘And do you think Mr Woodcourt will make another voyage?’ I asked
him when I had hummed it quietly all through.

T don't quite know what to think, my dear, but I should say it was
likely at present that he will give a long trip to another country.’

T am sure he will take the best wishes of all our hearts with him
wherever he goes,’ said I; ‘and though they are not riches, he will
never be the poorer for them, guardian, at least.’

‘Never, little woman,’ he replied.

I was sitting in my usual place, which was now beside my guardian's
chair. That had not been my usual place before the letter, but it was
now. I looked up to Ada, who was sitting opposite, and I saw, as she
looked at me, that her eyes were filled with tears and that tears were
falling down her face. I felt that I had only to be placid and merry once
for all to undeceive my dear and set her loving heart at rest. I really
was so, and I had nothing to do but to be myself.

So I made my sweet girl lean upon my shoulder--how little thinking
what was heavy on her mind!--and I said she was not quite well, and
put my arm about her, and took her upstairs. When we were in our
own room, and when she might perhaps have told me what I was so
unprepared to hear, I gave her no encouragement to confide in me; I
never thought she stood in need of it.

‘Oh, my dear good Esther,’ said Ada, ‘if I could only make up my mind
to speak to you and my cousin John when you are together!’

‘Why, my love!’ I remonstrated. ‘Ada, why should you not speak to us!’
Ada only dropped her head and pressed me closer to her heart.

‘You surely don't forget, my beauty,’ said I, smiling, ‘what quiet, old-
fashioned people we are and how I have settled down to be the
discreetest of dames? You don't forget how happily and peacefully my
life is all marked out for me, and by whom? I am certain that you

don't forget by what a noble character, Ada. That can never be.’

‘No, never, Esther.’
‘Why then, my dear,’ said I, ‘there can be nothing amiss--and why
should you not speak to us?’

‘Nothing amiss, Esther?’ returned Ada. ‘Oh, when I think of all these
years, and of his fatherly care and kindness, and of the old relations
among us, and of you, what shall I do, what shall I do!’

I looked at my child in some wonder, but I thought it better not to
answer otherwise than by cheering her, and so I turned off into many
little recollections of our life together and prevented her from saying
more. When she lay down to sleep, and not before, I returned to my
guardian to say good night, and then I came back to Ada and sat near
her for a little while.

She was asleep, and I thought as I looked at her that she was a little
changed. I had thought so more than once lately. I could not decide,
even looking at her while she was unconscious, how she was changed,
but something in the familiar beauty of her face looked different to
me. My guardian's old hopes of her and Richard arose sorrowfully in
my mind, and I said to myself, ‘She has been anxious about him,’ and
I wondered how that love would end.

When I had come home from Caddy's while she was ill, I had often
found Ada at work, and she had always put her work away, and I had
never known what it was. Some of it now lay in a drawer near her,
which was not quite closed. I did not open the drawer, but I still
rather wondered what the work could he, for it was evidently nothing
for herself.

And I noticed as I kissed my dear that she lay with one hand under
her pillow so that it was hidden.

How much less amiable I must have been than they thought me, how
much less amiable than I thought myself, to be so preoccupied with
my own cheerfulness and contentment as to think that it only rested
with me to put my dear girl right and set her mind at peace!

But I lay down, self-deceived, in that belief. And I awoke in it next day
to find that there was still the same shade between me and my
darling.
CHAPTER LI - Enlightened

When Mr Woodcourt arrived in London, he went, that very same day,
to Mr Vholes's in Symond's Inn. For he never once, from the moment
when I entreated him to be a friend to Richard, neglected or forgot his
promise. He had told me that he accepted the charge as a sacred
trust, and he was ever true to it in that spirit.

He found Mr Vholes in his office and informed Mr Vholes of his
agreement with Richard that he should call there to learn his address.

Just so, sir,’ said Mr Vholes. “Mr C.'s address is not a hundred miles
from here, sir, Mr C.'s address is not a hundred miles from here.
Would you take a seat, sir?’

Mr Woodcourt thanked Mr Vholes, but he had no business with him
beyond what he had mentioned.

Just so, sir. I believe, sir,’ said Mr Vholes, still quietly insisting on the
seat by not giving the address, ‘that you have influence with Mr C.
Indeed I am aware that you have.’

T was not aware of it myself,’ returned Mr Woodcourt; ‘but I suppose
you know best.’

‘Sir,’ rejoined Mr Vholes, self-contained as usual, voice and all, ‘itis a
part of my professional duty to know best. It is a part of my
professional duty to study and to understand a gentleman who
confides his interests to me. In my professional duty I shall not be
wanting, sir, if I know it. I may, with the best intentions, be wanting in
it without knowing it; but not if I know it, sir.’

Mr Woodcourt again mentioned the address.

‘Give me leave, sir,’ said Mr Vholes. ‘Bear with me for a moment. Sir,
Mr C. is playing for a considerable stake, and cannot play without--
need I say what?’

‘Money, I presume?’

‘Sir,’ said Mr Vholes, ‘to be honest with you (honesty being my golden
rule, whether I gain by it or lose, and I find that I generally lose),
money is the word. Now, sir, upon the chances of Mr C.'s game I
express to you no opinion, NO opinion. It might be highly impolitic in
Mr C., after playing so long and so high, to leave off; it might be the
reverse; I say nothing. No, sir,’ said Mr Vholes, bringing his hand flat
down upon his desk in a positive manner, ‘nothing.’
‘You seem to forget,’ returned Mr Woodcourt, ‘that I ask you to say
nothing and have no interest in anything you say.’

‘Pardon me, sir!’ retorted Mr Vholes. ‘You do yourself an injustice. No,
sir! Pardon me! You shall not--shall not in my office, if I know it--do
yourself an injustice. You are interested in anything, and in
everything, that relates to your friend. I know human nature much
better, sir, than to admit for an instant that a gentleman of your
appearance is not interested in whatever concerns his friend.’

‘Well,’ replied Mr Woodcourt, ‘that may be. I am particularly interested
in his address.’

‘The number, sir,’ said Mr Vholes parenthetically, I believe I have
already mentioned. If Mr C. is to continue to play for this considerable
stake, sir, he must have funds. Understand me! There are funds in
hand at present. I ask for nothing; there are funds in hand. But for
the onward play, more funds must be provided, unless Mr C. is to
throw away what he has already ventured, which is wholly and solely
a point for his consideration. This, sir, I take the opportunity of
stating openly to you as the friend of Mr C. Without funds I shall
always be happy to appear and act for Mr C. to the extent of all such
costs as are safe to be allowed out of the estate, not beyond that. I
could not go beyond that, sir, without wronging some one. I must
either wrong my three dear girls or my venerable father, who is
entirely dependent on me, in the Vale of Taunton; or some one.
Whereas, sir, my resolution is (call it weakness or folly if you please) to
wrong no one.’

Mr Woodcourt rather sternly rejoined that he was glad to hear it.

T wish, sir,’ said Mr Vholes, ‘to leave a good name behind me.
Therefore I take every opportunity of openly stating to a friend of Mr C.
how Mr C. is situated. As to myself, sir, the labourer is worthy of his
hire. If I undertake to put my shoulder to the wheel, I do it, and I earn
what I get. Iam here for that purpose. My name is painted on the door
outside, with that object.’

‘And Mr Carstone's address, Mr Vholes?’

‘Sir,’ returned Mr Vholes, ‘as I believe I have already mentioned, it is
next door. On the second story you will find Mr C.'s apartments. Mr C.
desires to be near his professional adviser, and I am far from
objecting, for I court inquiry.’

Upon this Mr Woodcourt wished Mr Vholes good day and went in
search of Richard, the change in whose appearance he began to
understand now but too well.
He found him in a dull room, fadedly furnished, much as I had found
him in his barrack-room but a little while before, except that he was
not writing but was sitting with a book before him, from which his
eyes and thoughts were far astray. As the door chanced to be standing
open, Mr Woodcourt was in his presence for some moments without
being perceived, and he told me that he never could forget the
haggardness of his face and the dejection of his manner before he was
aroused from his dream.

‘Woodcourt, my dear fellow,’ cried Richard, starting up with extended
hands, ‘you come upon my vision like a ghost.’

‘A friendly one,’ he replied, ‘and only waiting, as they say ghosts do, to
be addressed. How does the mortal world go?’ They were seated now,
near together.

‘Badly enough, and slowly enough,’ said Richard, ‘speaking at least for
my part of it.’

‘What part is that?’
‘The Chancery part.’

T never heard,’ returned Mr Woodcourt, shaking his head, ‘of its going
well yet.’

‘Nor I,’ said Richard moodily. ‘Who ever did?’ He brightened again ina
moment and said with his natural openness, ‘Woodcourt, I should be
sorry to be misunderstood by you, even if I gained by it in your
estimation. You must know that I have done no good this long time. I
have not intended to do much harm, but I seem to have been capable
of nothing else. It may be that I should have done better by keeping
out of the net into which my destiny has worked me, but I think not,
though I dare say you will soon hear, if you have not already heard, a
very different opinion. To make short of a long story, I am afraid I have
wanted an object; but I have an object now--or it has me--and it is too
late to discuss it. Take me as I am, and make the best of me.’

‘A bargain,’ said Mr Woodcourt. ‘Do as much by me in return.’

‘Oh! You,’ returned Richard, ‘you can pursue your art for its own sake,
and can put your hand upon the plough and never turn, and can
strike a purpose out of anything. You and I are very different
creatures.’

He spoke regretfully and lapsed for a moment into his weary
condition.
‘Well, well!’ he cried, shaking it off. ‘Everything has an end. We shall
see! So you will take me as Iam, and make the best of me?’

‘Aye! Indeed I will.’ They shook hands upon it laughingly, but in deep
earnestness. I can answer for one of them with my heart of hearts.

‘You come as a godsend,’ said Richard, ‘for I have seen nobody here
yet but Vholes. Woodcourt, there is one subject I should like to
mention, for once and for all, in the beginning of our treaty. You can
hardly make the best of me if I don't. You know, I dare say, that I have
an attachment to my cousin Ada?’

Mr Woodcourt replied that I had hinted as much to him. ‘Now pray,’
returned Richard, ‘don't think me a heap of selfishness. Don't suppose
that I am splitting my head and half breaking my heart over this
miserable Chancery suit for my own rights and interests alone. Ada's
are bound up with mine; they can't be separated; Vholes works for
both of us. Do think of that!’

He was so very solicitous on this head that Mr Woodcourt gave him
the strongest assurances that he did him no injustice.

‘You see,’ said Richard, with something pathetic in his manner of
lingering on the point, though it was off-hand and unstudied, ‘to an
upright fellow like you, bringing a friendly face like yours here, I
cannot bear the thought of appearing selfish and mean. I want to see
Ada righted, Woodcourt, as well as myself; I want to do my utmost to
right her, as well as myself; I venture what I can scrape together to
extricate her, as well as myself. Do, I beseech you, think of that!’

Afterwards, when Mr Woodcourt came to reflect on what had passed,
he was so very much impressed by the strength of Richard's anxiety
on this point that in telling me generally of his first visit to Symond's
Inn he particularly dwelt upon it. It revived a fear I had had before
that my dear girl's little property would be absorbed by Mr Vholes and
that Richard's justification to himself would be sincerely this. It was
just as I began to take care of Caddy that the interview took place,
and I now return to the time when Caddy had recovered and the
shade was still between me and my darling.

I proposed to Ada that morning that we should go and see Richard. It
a little surprised me to find that she hesitated and was not so

radiantly willing as I had expected.

‘My dear,’ said I, ‘you have not had any difference with Richard since I
have been so much away?’

‘No, Esther.’
‘Not heard of him, perhaps?’ said I.
‘Yes, I have heard of him,’ said Ada.

Such tears in her eyes, and such love in her face. I could not make my
darling out. Should I go to Richard's by myself? I said. No, Ada
thought I had better not go by myself. Would she go with me? Yes,
Ada thought she had better go with me. Should we go now? Yes, let us
go now. Well, I could not understand my darling, with the tears in her
eyes and the love in her face!

We were soon equipped and went out. It was a sombre day, and drops
of chill rain fell at intervals. It was one of those colourless days when
everything looks heavy and harsh. The houses frowned at us, the dust
rose at us, the smoke swooped at us, nothing made any compromise
about itself or wore a softened aspect. I fancied my beautiful girl quite
out of place in the rugged streets, and I thought there were more
funerals passing along the dismal pavements than I had ever seen
before.

We had first to find out Symond's Inn. We were going to inquire in a
shop when Ada said she thought it was near Chancery Lane. ‘We are
not likely to be far out, my love, if we go in that direction,’ said I. So to
Chancery Lane we went, and there, sure enough, we saw it written up.
Symond's Inn.

We had next to find out the number. ‘Or Mr Vholes's office will do,’ I
recollected, ‘for Mr Vholes's office is next door.’ Upon which Ada said,
perhaps that was Mr Vholes's office in the corner there. And it really
was.

Then came the question, which of the two next doors? I was going for
the one, and my darling was going for the other; and my darling was
right again. So up we went to the second story, when we came to
Richard's name in great white letters on a hearse-like panel.

I should have knocked, but Ada said perhaps we had better turn the
handle and go in. Thus we came to Richard, poring over a table
covered with dusty bundles of papers which seemed to me like dusty
mirrors reflecting his own mind. Wherever I looked I saw the ominous
words that ran in it repeated. Jarndyce and Jarndyce.

He received us very affectionately, and we sat down. Tf you had come
a little earlier,’ he said, ‘you would have found Woodcourt here. There
never was such a good fellow as Woodcourt is. He finds time to look in
between-whiles, when anybody else with half his work to do would be
thinking about not being able to come. And he is so cheery, so fresh,
so sensible, so earnest, so--everything that I am not, that the place
brightens whenever he comes, and darkens whenever he goes again.’

‘God bless him,’ I thought, ‘for his truth to me!’

‘He is not so sanguine, Ada,’ continued Richard, casting his dejected
look over the bundles of papers, ‘as Vholes and I are usually, but he is
only an outsider and is not in the mysteries. We have gone into them,
and he has not. He can't be expected to know much of such a
labyrinth.’

As his look wandered over the papers again and he passed his two
hands over his head, I noticed how sunken and how large his eyes
appeared, how dry his lips were, and how his finger-nails were all
bitten away.

Ts this a healthy place to live in, Richard, do you think?’ said I.

‘Why, my dear Minerva,’ answered Richard with his old gay laugh, ‘it
is neither a rural nor a cheerful place; and when the sun shines here,
you may lay a pretty heavy wager that it is shining brightly in an open
spot. But it's well enough for the time. It's near the offices and near
Vholes.’

‘Perhaps,’ I hinted, ‘a change from both--’

‘Might do me good?’ said Richard, forcing a laugh as he finished the
sentence. ‘I shouldn't wonder! But it can only come in one way now--
in one of two ways, I should rather say. Either the suit must be ended,
Esther, or the suitor. But it shall be the suit, my dear girl, the suit,
my dear girl!’

These latter words were addressed to Ada, who was sitting nearest to
him. Her face being turned away from me and towards him, I could
not see it.

‘We are doing very well,’ pursued Richard. ‘Vholes will tell you so. We
are really spinning along. Ask Vholes. We are giving them no rest.
Vholes knows all their windings and turnings, and we are upon them
everywhere. We have astonished them already. We shall rouse up that
nest of sleepers, mark my words!’

His hopefulness had long been more painful to me than his
despondency; it was so unlike hopefulness, had something so fierce in
its determination to be it, was so hungry and eager, and yet so
conscious of being forced and unsustainable that it had long touched
me to the heart. But the commentary upon it now indelibly written in
his handsome face made it far more distressing than it used to be. I
say indelibly, for I felt persuaded that if the fatal cause could have
been for ever terminated, according to his brightest visions, in that
same hour, the traces of the premature anxiety, self-reproach, and
disappointment it had occasioned him would have remained upon his
features to the hour of his death.

‘The sight of our dear little woman,’ said Richard, Ada still remaining
silent and quiet, ‘is so natural to me, and her compassionate face is so
like the face of old days--’

Ah! No, no. I smiled and shook my head.

‘“--So exactly like the face of old days,’ said Richard in his cordial voice,
and taking my hand with the brotherly regard which nothing ever
changed, ‘that I can't make pretences with her. I fluctuate a little;
that's the truth. Sometimes I hope, my dear, and sometimes I--don't
quite despair, but nearly. I get,’ said Richard, relinquishing my hand
gently and walking across the room, ‘so tired!’

He took a few turns up and down and sunk upon the sofa. 1 get,’ he
repeated gloomily, ‘so tired. It is such weary, weary work!’

He was leaning on his arm saying these words in a meditative voice
and looking at the ground when my darling rose, put off her bonnet,
kneeled down beside him with her golden hair falling like sunlight on
his head, clasped her two arms round his neck, and turned her face to
me. Oh, what a loving and devoted face I saw!

‘Esther, dear,’ she said very quietly, I am not going home again.’
A light shone in upon me all at once.

‘Never any more. I am going to stay with my dear husband. We have
been married above two months. Go home without me, my own
Esther; I shall never go home any more!’ With those words my darling
drew his head down on her breast and held it there. And if ever in my
life I saw a love that nothing but death could change, I saw it then
before me.

‘Speak to Esther, my dearest,’ said Richard, breaking the silence
presently. ‘Tell her how it was.’

I met her before she could come to me and folded her in my arms. We
neither of us spoke, but with her cheek against my own I wanted to
hear nothing. ‘My pet,’ said I. ‘My love. My poor, poor girl!’ I pitied her
so much. I was very fond of Richard, but the impulse that I had upon
me was to pity her so much.
‘Esther, will you forgive me? Will my cousin John forgive me?’

‘My dear,’ said I, ‘to doubt it for a moment is to do him a great wrong.
And as to me!’ Why, as to me, what had I to forgive!

I dried my sobbing darling's eyes and sat beside her on the sofa, and
Richard sat on my other side; and while I was reminded of that so
different night when they had first taken me into their confidence and
had gone on in their own wild happy way, they told me between them
how it was.

‘All I had was Richard's,’ Ada said; ‘and Richard would not take it,
Esther, and what could I do but be his wife when I loved him dearly!’

‘And you were so fully and so kindly occupied, excellent Dame
Durden,’ said Richard, ‘that how could we speak to you at such a
time! And besides, it was not a long-considered step. We went out one
morning and were married.’

‘And when it was done, Esther,’ said my darling, I was always
thinking how to tell you and what to do for the best. And sometimes I
thought you ought to know it directly, and sometimes I thought you
ought not to know it and keep it from my cousin John; and I could not
tell what to do, and I fretted very much.’

How selfish I must have been not to have thought of this before! I
don't know what I said now. I was so sorry, and yet I was so fond of
them and so glad that they were fond of me; I pitied them so much,
and yet I felt a kind of pride in their loving one another. I never had
experienced such painful and pleasurable emotion at one time, and in
my own heart I did not know which predominated. But I was not there
to darken their way; I did not do that.

When I was less foolish and more composed, my darling took her
wedding-ring from her bosom, and kissed it, and put it on. Then I
remembered last night and told Richard that ever since her marriage
she had worn it at night when there was no one to see. Then Ada
blushingly asked me how did I know that, my dear. Then I told Ada
how I had seen her hand concealed under her pillow and had little
thought why, my dear. Then they began telling me how it was all over
again, and I began to be sorry and glad again, and foolish again, and
to hide my plain old face as much as I could lest I should put them
out of heart.

Thus the time went on until it became necessary for me to think of
returning. When that time arrived it was the worst of all, for then my
darling completely broke down. She clung round my neck, calling me
by every dear name she could think of and saying what should she do
without me! Nor was Richard much better; and as for me, I should
have been the worst of the three if I had not severely said to myself,
‘Now Esther, if you do, I'll never speak to you again!’

‘Why, I declare,’ said I, I never saw such a wife. I don't think she loves
her husband at all. Here, Richard, take my child, for goodness' sake.’
But I held her tight all the while, and could have wept over her I don't
know how long.

T give this dear young couple notice,’ said I, ‘that I am only going away
to come back to-morrow and that I shall be always coming backwards
and forwards until Symond's Inn is tired of the sight of me. So I shall
not say good-bye, Richard. For what would be the use of that, you
know, when I am coming back so soon!’

I had given my darling to him now, and I meant to go; but I lingered
for one more look of the precious face which it seemed to rive my heart
to turn from.

So I said (in a merry, bustling manner) that unless they gave me some
encouragement to come back, I was not sure that I could take that
liberty, upon which my dear girl looked up, faintly smiling through her
tears, and I folded her lovely face between my hands, and gave it one
last kiss, and laughed, and ran away.

And when I got downstairs, oh, how I cried! It almost seemed to me
that I had lost my Ada for ever. I was so lonely and so blank without
her, and it was so desolate to be going home with no hope of seeing
her there, that I could get no comfort for a little while as I walked up
and down in a dim corner sobbing and crying.

I came to myself by and by, after a little scolding, and took a coach
home. The poor boy whom I had found at St. Albans had reappeared a
short time before and was lying at the point of death; indeed, was then
dead, though I did not know it. My guardian had gone out to inquire
about him and did not return to dinner. Being quite alone, I cried a
little again, though on the whole I don't think I behaved so very, very
ill.

It was only natural that I should not be quite accustomed to the loss
of my darling yet. Three or four hours were not a long time after years.
But my mind dwelt so much upon the uncongenial scene in which I
had left her, and I pictured it as such an overshadowed stony-hearted
one, and I so longed to be near her and taking some sort of care of
her, that I determined to go back in the evening only to look up at her
windows.
It was foolish, I dare say, but it did not then seem at all so to me, and
it does not seem quite so even now. I took Charley into my confidence,
and we went out at dusk. It was dark when we came to the new
strange home of my dear girl, and there was a light behind the yellow
blinds. We walked past cautiously three or four times, looking up, and
narrowly missed encountering Mr Vholes, who came out of his office
while we were there and turned his head to look up too before going
home. The sight of his lank black figure and the lonesome air of that
nook in the dark were favourable to the state of my mind. I thought of
the youth and love and beauty of my dear girl, shut up in such an ill-
assorted refuge, almost as if it were a cruel place.

It was very solitary and very dull, and I did not doubt that I might
safely steal upstairs. I left Charley below and went up with a light foot,
not distressed by any glare from the feeble oil lanterns on the way. I
listened for a few moments, and in the musty rotting silence of the
house believed that I could hear the murmur of their young voices. I
put my lips to the hearse-like panel of the door as a kiss for my dear
and came quietly down again, thinking that one of these days I would
confess to the visit.

And it really did me good, for though nobody but Charley and I knew
anything about it, I somehow felt as if it had diminished the
separation between Ada and me and had brought us together again
for those moments. I went back, not quite accustomed yet to the
change, but all the better for that hovering about my darling.

My guardian had come home and was standing thoughtfully by the
dark window. When I went in, his face cleared and he came to his
seat, but he caught the light upon my face as I took mine.

‘Little woman,’ said he, ‘You have been crying.’

‘Why, yes, guardian,’ said I, I am afraid I have been, a little. Ada has
been in such distress, and is so very sorry, guardian.’

I put my arm on the back of his chair, and I saw in his glance that my
words and my look at her empty place had prepared him.

‘Is she married, my dear?’

I told him all about it and how her first entreaties had referred to his
forgiveness.

‘She has no need of it,’ said he. ‘Heaven bless her and her husband!’
But just as my first impulse had been to pity her, so was his. ‘Poor
girl, poor girl! Poor Rick! Poor Ada!’
Neither of us spoke after that, until he said with a sigh, ‘Well, well, my
dear! Bleak House is thinning fast.’

‘But its mistress remains, guardian.’ Though I was timid about saying
it, I ventured because of the sorrowful tone in which he had spoken.
‘She will do all she can to make it happy,’ said I.

‘She will succeed, my love!’

The letter had made no difference between us except that the seat by
his side had come to be mine; it made none now. He turned his old
bright fatherly look upon me, laid his hand on my hand in his old
way, and said again, ‘She will succeed, my dear. Nevertheless, Bleak
House is thinning fast, O little woman!’

I was sorry presently that this was all we said about that. I was rather
disappointed. I feared I might not quite have been all I had meant to
be since the letter and the answer.
CHAPTER LII - Obstinacy

But one other day had intervened when, early in the morning as we
were going to breakfast, Mr Woodcourt came in haste with the
astounding news that a terrible murder had been committed for which
Mr George had been apprehended and was in custody. When he told
us that a large reward was offered by Sir Leicester Dedlock for the
murderer's apprehension, I did not in my first consternation
understand why; but a few more words explained to me that the
murdered person was Sir Leicester's lawyer, and immediately my
mother's dread of him rushed into my remembrance.

This unforeseen and violent removal of one whom she had long
watched and distrusted and who had long watched and distrusted
her, one for whom she could have had few intervals of kindness,
always dreading in him a dangerous and secret enemy, appeared so
awful that my first thoughts were of her. How appalling to hear of
such a death and be able to feel no pity! How dreadful to remember,
perhaps, that she had sometimes even wished the old man away who
was so swiftly hurried out of life!

Such crowding reflections, increasing the distress and fear I always
felt when the name was mentioned, made me so agitated that I could
scarcely hold my place at the table. I was quite unable to follow the
conversation until I had had a little time to recover. But when I came
to myself and saw how shocked my guardian was and found that they
were earnestly speaking of the suspected man and recalling every
favourable impression we had formed of him out of the good we had
known of him, my interest and my fears were so strongly aroused in
his behalf that I was quite set up again.

‘Guardian, you don't think it possible that he is justly accused?’

‘My dear, I CAN'T think so. This man whom we have seen so open-
hearted and compassionate, who with the might of a giant has the
gentleness of a child, who looks as brave a fellow as ever lived and is
so simple and quiet with it, this man justly accused of such a crime? I
can't believe it. It's not that I don't or I won't. I can't!’

‘And I can't,’ said Mr Woodcourt. ‘Still, whatever we believe or know of
him, we had better not forget that some appearances are against him.
He bore an animosity towards the deceased gentleman. He has openly
mentioned it in many places. He is said to have expressed himself
violently towards him, and he certainly did about him, to my
knowledge. He admits that he was alone on the scene of the murder
within a few minutes of its commission. I sincerely believe him to be
as innocent of any participation in it as I am, but these are all reasons
for suspicion falling upon him.’
‘True,’ said my guardian. And he added, turning to me, ‘It would be
doing him a very bad service, my dear, to shut our eyes to the truth in
any of these respects.’

I felt, of course, that we must admit, not only to ourselves but to
others, the full force of the circumstances against him. Yet I knew
withal (I could not help saying) that their weight would not induce us
to desert him in his need.

‘Heaven forbid!’ returned my guardian. ‘We will stand by him, as he
himself stood by the two poor creatures who are gone.’ He meant Mr
Gridley and the boy, to both of whom Mr George had given shelter.

Mr Woodcourt then told us that the trooper's man had been with him
before day, after wandering about the streets all night like a distracted
creature. That one of the trooper's first anxieties was that we should
not suppose him guilty. That he had charged his messenger to
represent his perfect innocence with every solemn assurance he could
send us. That Mr Woodcourt had only quieted the man by
undertaking to come to our house very early in the morning with
these representations. He added that he was now upon his way to see
the prisoner himself.

My guardian said directly he would go too. Now, besides that I liked
the retired soldier very much and that he liked me, I had that secret
interest in what had happened which was only known to my guardian.
I felt as if it came close and near to me. It seemed to become
personally important to myself that the truth should be discovered
and that no innocent people should be suspected, for suspicion, once
run wild, might run wilder.

In a word, I felt as if it were my duty and obligation to go with them.
My guardian did not seek to dissuade me, and I went.

It was a large prison with many courts and passages so like one
another and so uniformly paved that I seemed to gain a new
comprehension, as I passed along, of the fondness that solitary
prisoners, shut up among the same staring walls from year to year,
have had--as I have read--for a weed or a stray blade of grass. In an
arched room by himself, like a cellar upstairs, with walls so glaringly
white that they made the massive iron window-bars and iron-bound
door even more profoundly black than they were, we found the trooper
standing in a corner. He had been sitting on a bench there and had
risen when he heard the locks and bolts turn.

When he saw us, he came forward a step with his usual heavy tread,
and there stopped and made a slight bow. But as I still advanced,
putting out my hand to him, he understood us in a moment.
‘This is a load off my mind, I do assure you, miss and gentlemen,’ said
he, saluting us with great heartiness and drawing a long breath. ‘And
now I don't so much care how it ends.’

He scarcely seemed to be the prisoner. What with his coolness and his
soldierly bearing, he looked far more like the prison guard.

‘This is even a rougher place than my gallery to receive a lady in,’ said
Mr George, ‘but I know Miss Summerson will make the best of it.’ As
he handed me to the bench on which he had been sitting, I sat down,
which seemed to give him great satisfaction.

T thank you, miss,’ said he.

‘Now, George,’ observed my guardian, ‘as we require no new
assurances on your part, so I believe we need give you none on ours.’

‘Not at all, sir. I thank you with all my heart. If I was not innocent of
this crime, I couldn't look at you and keep my secret to myself under
the condescension of the present visit. I feel the present visit very
much. I am not one of the eloquent sort, but I feel it, Miss Summerson
and gentlemen, deeply.’

He laid his hand for a moment on his broad chest and bent his head
to us. Although he squared himself again directly, he expressed a
great amount of natural emotion by these simple means.

First,’ said my guardian, ‘can we do anything for your personal
comfort, George?’

‘For which, sir?’ he inquired, clearing his throat.

‘For your personal comfort. Is there anything you want that would
lessen the hardship of this confinement?’

‘Well, sir,’ replied George, after a little cogitation, ‘I am equally obliged
to you, but tobacco being against the rules, I can't say that there is.’

‘You will think of many little things perhaps, by and by. Whenever you
do, George, let us know.’

Thank you, sir. Howsoever,’ observed Mr George with one of his
sunburnt smiles, ‘a man who has been knocking about the world in a
vagabond kind of a way as long as I have gets on well enough in a
place like the present, so far as that goes.’

‘Next, as to your case,’ observed my guardian.
‘Exactly so, sir,’ returned Mr George, folding his arms upon his breast
with perfect self-possession and a little curiosity.

‘How does it stand now?’

‘Why, sir, it is under remand at present. Bucket gives me to
understand that he will probably apply for a series of remands from
time to time until the case is more complete. How it is to be made
more complete I don't myself see, but I dare say Bucket will manage it
somehow.’

‘Why, heaven save us, man,’ exclaimed my guardian, surprised into
his old oddity and vehemence, ‘you talk of yourself as if you were
somebody else!’

‘No offence, sir,’ said Mr George. ‘I am very sensible of your kindness.
But I don't see how an innocent man is to make up his mind to this
kind of thing without knocking his head against the walls unless he
takes it in that point of view.’

‘That is true enough to a certain extent,’ returned my guardian,
softened. ‘But my good fellow, even an innocent man must take
ordinary precautions to defend himself.’

‘Certainly, sir. And I have done so. I have stated to the magistrates,
‘Gentlemen, I am as innocent of this charge as yourselves; what has
been stated against me in the way of facts is perfectly true; I know no
more about it.' I intend to continue stating that, sir. What more can I
do? It's the truth.’

‘But the mere truth won't do,’ rejoined my guardian.

‘Won't it indeed, sir? Rather a bad look-out for me!’ Mr George good-
humouredly observed.

‘You must have a lawyer,’ pursued my guardian. ‘We must engage a
good one for you.’

T ask your pardon, sir,’ said Mr George with a step backward. I am
equally obliged. But I must decidedly beg to be excused from anything
of that sort.’

‘You won't have a lawyer?’

‘No, sir.” Mr George shook his head in the most emphatic manner. 1
thank you all the same, sir, but--no lawyer!’

‘Why not?’
T don't take kindly to the breed,’ said Mr George. ‘Gridley didn't. And--
if you'll excuse my saying so much--I should hardly have thought you
did yourself, sir.’

‘That's equity,’ my guardian explained, a little at a loss; ‘that's equity,
George.’

Ts it, indeed, sir?’ returned the trooper in his off-hand manner. IT am
not acquainted with those shades of names myself, but in a general
way I object to the breed.’

Unfolding his arms and changing his position, he stood with one
massive hand upon the table and the other on his hip, as complete a
picture of a man who was not to be moved from a fixed purpose as
ever I saw. It was in vain that we all three talked to him and
endeavoured to persuade him; he listened with that gentleness which
went so well with his bluff bearing, but was evidently no more shaken
by our representations that his place of confinement was.

‘Pray think, once more, Mr George,’ said I. ‘Have you no wish in
reference to your case?’

T certainly could wish it to be tried, miss,’ he returned, ‘by court-
martial; but that is out of the question, as I am well aware. If you will
be so good as to favour me with your attention for a couple of
minutes, miss, not more, I'll endeavour to explain myself as clearly as
I can.’

He looked at us all three in turn, shook his head a little as if he were
adjusting it in the stock and collar of a tight uniform, and after a
moment's reflection went on.

‘You see, miss, I have been handcuffed and taken into custody and
brought here. I am a marked and disgraced man, and here I am. My
shooting gallery is rummaged, high and low, by Bucket; such property
as I have--'tis small--is turned this way and that till it don't know
itself; and (as aforesaid) here I am! I don't particular complain of that.
Though I am in these present quarters through no immediately
preceding fault of mine, I can very well understand that if I hadn't
gone into the vagabond way in my youth, this wouldn't have
happened. It HAS happened. Then comes the question how to meet it.’

He rubbed his swarthy forehead for a moment with a good-humoured
look and said apologetically, I am such a short-winded talker that I
must think a bit.’ Having thought a bit, he looked up again and
resumed.
‘How to meet it. Now, the unfortunate deceased was himself a lawyer
and had a pretty tight hold of me. I don't wish to rake up his ashes,
but he had, what I should call if he was living, a devil of a tight hold of
me. I don't like his trade the better for that. If I had kept clear of his
trade, I should have kept outside this place. But that's not what I
mean. Now, suppose I had killed him. Suppose I really had discharged
into his body any one of those pistols recently fired off that Bucket
has found at my place, and dear me, might have found there any day
since it has been my place. What should I have done as soon as I was
hard and fast here? Got a lawyer.’

He stopped on hearing some one at the locks and bolts and did not
resume until the door had been opened and was shut again. For what
purpose opened, I will mention presently.

T should have got a lawyer, and he would have said (as I have often
read in the newspapers), 'My client says nothing, my client reserves
his defence': my client this, that, and t'other. Well, 'tis not the custom
of that breed to go straight, according to my opinion, or to think that
other men do. Say I am innocent and I get a lawyer. He would be as
likely to believe me guilty as not; perhaps more. What would he do,
whether or not? Act as if I was-- shut my mouth up, tell me not to
commit myself, keep circumstances back, chop the evidence small,
quibble, and get me off perhaps! But, Miss Summerson, do I care for
getting off in that way; or would I rather be hanged in my own way--if
you'll excuse my mentioning anything so disagreeable to a lady?’

He had warmed into his subject now, and was under no further
necessity to wait a bit.

T would rather be hanged in my own way. And I mean to be! I don't
intend to say,’ looking round upon us with his powerful arms akimbo
and his dark eyebrows raised, ‘that I am more partial to being hanged
than another man. What I say is, I must come off clear and full or not
at all. Therefore, when I hear stated against me what is true, I say it's
true; and when they tell me, 'whatever you say will be used,' I tell
them I don't mind that; I mean it to be used. If they can't make me
innocent out of the whole truth, they are not likely to do it out of
anything less, or anything else. And if they are, it's worth nothing to
me.’

Taking a pace or two over the stone floor, he came back to the table
and finished what he had to say.

T thank you, miss and gentlemen both, many times for your attention,
and many times more for your interest. That's the plain state of the
matter as it points itself out to a mere trooper with a blunt
broadsword kind of a mind. I have never done well in life beyond my
duty as a soldier, and if the worst comes after all, I shall reap pretty
much as I have sown. When I got over the first crash of being seized
as a murderer--it don't take a rover who has knocked about so much
as myself so very long to recover from a crash--I worked my way round
to what you find me now. As such I shall remain. No relations will be
disgraced by me or made unhappy for me, and--and that's all I've got
to say.’

The door had been opened to admit another soldier-looking man of
less prepossessing appearance at first sight and a weather-tanned,
bright-eyed wholesome woman with a basket, who, from her entrance,
had been exceedingly attentive to all Mr George had said. Mr George
had received them with a familiar nod and a friendly look, but without
any more particular greeting in the midst of his address. He now
shook them cordially by the hand and said, ‘Miss Summerson and
gentlemen, this is an old comrade of mine, Matthew Bagnet. And this
is his wife, Mrs Bagnet.’

Mr Bagnet made us a stiff military bow, and Mrs Bagnet dropped us a
curtsy.

‘Real good friends of mine, they are,’ sald Mr George. Tt was at their
house I was taken.’

‘With a second-hand wiolinceller,’ Mr Bagnet put in, twitching his
head angrily. ‘Of a good tone. For a friend. That money was no object
to.’

‘Mat,’ said Mr George, ‘you have heard pretty well all I have been
saying to this lady and these two gentlemen. I know it meets your
approval?’

Mr Bagnet, after considering, referred the point to his wife. ‘Old girl,’
said he. Tell him. Whether or not. It meets my approval.’

‘Why, George,’ exclaimed Mrs Bagnet, who had been unpacking her
basket, in which there was a piece of cold pickled pork, a little tea and
sugar, and a brown loaf, ‘you ought to know it don't. You ought to
know it's enough to drive a person wild to hear you. You won't be got
off this way, and you won't be got off that way--what do you mean by
such picking and choosing? It's stuff and nonsense, George.’

‘Don't be severe upon me in my misfortunes, Mrs Bagnet,’ said the
trooper lightly.

‘Oh! Bother your misfortunes,’ cried Mrs Bagnet, ‘if they don't make
you more reasonable than that comes to. I never was so ashamed in
my life to hear a man talk folly as I have been to hear you talk this day
to the present company. Lawyers? Why, what but too many cooks
should hinder you from having a dozen lawyers if the gentleman
recommended them to you.’

‘This is a very sensible woman,’ said my guardian. I hope you will
persuade him, Mrs Bagnet.’

‘Persuade him, sir?’ she returned. ‘Lord bless you, no. You don't know
George. Now, there!’ Mrs Bagnet left her basket to point him out with
both her bare brown hands. There he stands! As self-willed and as
determined a man, in the wrong way, as ever put a human creature
under heaven out of patience! You could as soon take up and
shoulder an eight and forty pounder by your own strength as turn
that man when he has got a thing into his head and fixed it there.
Why, don't I know him!’ cried Mrs Bagnet. ‘Don't I know you, George!
You don't mean to set up for a new character with ME after all these
years, I hope?’

Her friendly indignation had an exemplary effect upon her husband,
who shook his head at the trooper several times as a silent
recommendation to him to yield. Between whiles, Mrs Bagnet looked
at me; and I understood from the play of her eyes that she wished me
to do something, though I did not comprehend what.

‘But I have given up talking to you, old fellow, years and years,’ said
Mrs Bagnet as she blew a little dust off the pickled pork, looking at me
again; ‘and when ladies and gentlemen know you as well as I do,
they'll give up talking to you too. If you are not too headstrong to
accept of a bit of dinner, here it is.’

T accept it with many thanks,’ returned the trooper.

‘Do you though, indeed?’ said Mrs Bagnet, continuing to grumble on
good-humouredly. ‘I'm sure I'm surprised at that. I wonder you don't
starve in your own way also. It would only be like you. Perhaps you'll
set your mind upon THAT next.’ Here she again looked at me, and I
now perceived from her glances at the door and at me, by turns, that
she wished us to retire and to await her following us outside the
prison. Communicating this by similar means to my guardian and Mr
Woodcourt, I rose.

‘We hope you will think better of it, Mr George,’ said I, ‘and we shall
come to see you again, trusting to find you more reasonable.’

‘More grateful, Miss Summerson, you can't find me,’ he returned.

‘But more persuadable we can, I hope,’ said I. ‘And let me entreat you
to consider that the clearing up of this mystery and the discovery of
the real perpetrator of this deed may be of the last importance to
others besides yourself.’

He heard me respectfully but without much heeding these words,
which I spoke a little turned from him, already on my way to the door;
he was observing (this they afterwards told me) my height and figure,
which seemed to catch his attention all at once.

“Tis curious,’ said he. ‘And yet I thought so at the time!’
My guardian asked him what he meant.

‘Why, sir,’ he answered, ‘when my ill fortune took me to the dead
man's staircase on the night of his murder, I saw a shape so like Miss
Summerson's go by me in the dark that I had half a mind to speak to
it.’

For an instant I felt such a shudder as I never felt before or since and
hope I shall never feel again.

It came downstairs as I went up,’ said the trooper, ‘and crossed the
moonlighted window with a loose black mantle on; I noticed a deep
fringe to it. However, it has nothing to do with the present subject,
excepting that Miss Summerson looked so like it at the moment that it
came into my head.’

I cannot separate and define the feelings that arose in me after this; it
is enough that the vague duty and obligation I had felt upon me from
the first of following the investigation was, without my distinctly
daring to ask myself any question, increased, and that I was
indignantly sure of there being no possibility of a reason for my being
afraid.

We three went out of the prison and walked up and down at some
short distance from the gate, which was in a retired place. We had not
waited long when Mr and Mrs Bagnet came out too and quickly joined
us.

There was a tear in each of Mrs Bagnet's eyes, and her face was
flushed and hurried. T didn't let George see what I thought about it,
you know, miss,’ was her first remark when she came up, ‘but he's in
a bad way, poor old fellow!’

‘Not with care and prudence and good help,’ said my guardian.
‘A gentleman like you ought to know best, sir,’ returned Mrs Bagnet,

hurriedly drying her eyes on the hem of her grey cloak, ‘but I am
uneasy for him. He has been so careless and said so much that he
never meant. The gentlemen of the juries might not understand him
as Lignum and me do. And then such a number of circumstances
have happened bad for him, and such a number of people will be
brought forward to speak against him, and Bucket is so deep.’

‘With a second-hand wiolinceller. And said he played the fife. When a
boy,’ Mr Bagnet added with great solemnity.

‘Now, I tell you, miss,’ said Mrs Bagnet; ‘and when I say miss, I mean
all! Just come into the corner of the wall and I'll tell you!’

Mrs Bagnet hurried us into a more secluded place and was at first too
breathless to proceed, occasioning Mr Bagnet to say, ‘Old girl! Tell
‘em!’

‘Why, then, miss,’ the old girl proceeded, untying the strings of her
bonnet for more air, ‘you could as soon move Dover Castle as move
George on this point unless you had got a new power to move him
with. And I have got it!’ ‘You are a jewel of a woman,’ said my
guardian. ‘Go on!’

‘Now, I tell you, miss,’ she proceeded, clapping her hands in her hurry
and agitation a dozen times in every sentence, ‘that what he says
concerning no relations is all bosh. They don't know of him, but he
does know of them. He has said more to me at odd times than to
anybody else, and it warn't for nothing that he once spoke to my
Woolwich about whitening and wrinkling mothers’ heads. For fifty
pounds he had seen his mother that day. She's alive and must be
brought here straight!’

Instantly Mrs Bagnet put some pins into her mouth and began
pinning up her skirts all round a little higher than the level of her grey
cloak, which she accomplished with surpassing dispatch and
dexterity.

‘Lignum,’ said Mrs Bagnet, ‘you take care of the children, old man,
and give me the umbrella! I'm away to Lincolnshire to bring that old
lady here.’

‘But, bless the woman,’ cried my guardian with his hand in his
pocket, ‘how is she going? What money has she got?’

Mrs Bagnet made another application to her skirts and brought forth
a leathern purse in which she hastily counted over a few shillings and
which she then shut up with perfect satisfaction.

‘Never you mind for me, miss. I'm a soldier's wife and accustomed to
travel my own way. Lignum, old boy,’ kissing him, ‘one for yourself,
three for the children. Now I'm away into Lincolnshire after George's
mother!’

And she actually set off while we three stood looking at one another
lost in amazement. She actually trudged away in her grey cloak at a
sturdy pace, and turned the corner, and was gone.

‘Mr Bagnet,’ said my guardian. ‘Do you mean to let her go in that
way?’

‘Can't help it,’ he returned. ‘Made her way home once from another
quarter of the world. With the same grey cloak. And same umbrella.
Whatever the old girl says, do. Do it! Whenever the old girl says, I'LL
do it. She does it.’

Then she is as honest and genuine as she looks,’ rejoined my
guardian, ‘and it is impossible to say more for her.’

‘She's Colour-Sergeant of the Nonpareil battalion,’ said Mr Bagnet,
looking at us over his shoulder as he went his way also. ‘And there's
not such another. But I never own to it before her. Discipline must be
maintained.’
CHAPTER LIII - The Track

Mr Bucket and his fat forefinger are much in consultation together
under existing circumstances. When Mr Bucket has a matter of this
pressing interest under his consideration, the fat forefinger seems to
rise, to the dignity of a familiar demon. He puts it to his ears, and it
whispers information; he puts it to his lips, and it enjoins him to
secrecy; he rubs it over his nose, and it sharpens his scent; he shakes
it before a guilty man, and it charms him to his destruction. The
Augurs of the Detective Temple invariably predict that when Mr
Bucket and that finger are in much conference, a terrible avenger will
be heard of before long.

Otherwise mildly studious in his observation of human nature, on the
whole a benignant philosopher not disposed to be severe upon the
follies of mankind, Mr Bucket pervades a vast number of houses and
strolls about an infinity of streets, to outward appearance rather
languishing for want of an object. He is in the friendliest condition
towards his species and will drink with most of them. He is free with
his money, affable in his manners, innocent in his conversation--but
through the placid stream of his life there glides an under-current of
forefinger.

Time and place cannot bind Mr Bucket. Like man in the abstract, he
is here to-day and gone to-morrow--but, very unlike man indeed, he is
here again the next day. This evening he will be casually looking into
the iron extinguishers at the door of Sir Leicester Dedlock's house in
town; and to-morrow morning he will be walking on the leads at
Chesney Wold, where erst the old man walked whose ghost is
propitiated with a hundred guineas. Drawers, desks, pockets, all
things belonging to him, Mr Bucket examines. A few hours afterwards,
he and the Roman will be alone together comparing forefingers.

It is likely that these occupations are irreconcilable with home
enjoyment, but it is certain that Mr Bucket at present does not go
home. Though in general he highly appreciates the society of Mrs
Bucket--a lady of a natural detective genius, which if it had been
improved by professional exercise, might have done great things, but
which has paused at the level of a clever amateur--he holds himself
aloof from that dear solace. Mrs Bucket is dependent on their lodger
(fortunately an amiable lady in whom she takes an interest) for
companionship and conversation.

A great crowd assembles in Lincoln's Inn Fields on the day of the
funeral. Sir Leicester Dedlock attends the ceremony in person; strictly
speaking, there are only three other human followers, that is to say,
Lord Doodle, William Buffy, and the debilitated cousin (thrown in as a
make-weight), but the amount of inconsolable carriages is immense.
The peerage contributes more four-wheeled affliction than has ever
been seen in that neighbourhood. Such is the assemblage of armorial
bearings on coach panels that the Herald's College might be supposed
to have lost its father and mother at a blow. The Duke of Foodle sends
a splendid pile of dust and ashes, with silver wheel-boxes, patent
axles, all the last improvements, and three bereaved worms, six feet
high, holding on behind, in a bunch of woe. All the state coachmen in
London seem plunged into mourning; and if that dead old man of the
rusty garb be not beyond a taste in horseflesh (which appears
impossible), it must be highly gratified this day.

Quiet among the undertakers and the equipages and the calves of so
many legs all steeped in grief, Mr Bucket sits concealed in one of the
inconsolable carriages and at his ease surveys the crowd through the
lattice blinds. He has a keen eye for a crowd--as for what not?--and
looking here and there, now from this side of the carriage, now from
the other, now up at the house windows, now along the people's
heads, nothing escapes him.

‘And there you are, my partner, eh?’ says Mr Bucket to himself,
apostrophizing Mrs Bucket, stationed, by his favour, on the steps of
the deceased's house. ‘And so you are. And so you are! And very well
indeed you are looking, Mrs Bucket!’

The procession has not started yet, but is waiting for the cause of its
assemblage to be brought out. Mr Bucket, in the foremost emblazoned
carriage, uses his two fat forefingers to hold the lattice a hair's
breadth open while he looks.

And it says a great deal for his attachment, as a husband, that he is
still occupied with Mrs B. There you are, my partner, eh?’ he
murmuringly repeats. ‘And our lodger with you. I'm taking notice of
you, Mrs Bucket; I hope you're all right in your health, my dear!’

Not another word does Mr Bucket say, but sits with most attentive
eyes until the sacked depository of noble secrets is brought down--
Where are all those secrets now? Does he keep them yet? Did they fly
with him on that sudden journey?--and until the procession moves,
and Mr Bucket's view is changed. After which he composes himself for
an easy ride and takes note of the fittings of the carriage in case he
should ever find such knowledge useful.

Contrast enough between Mr Tulkinghorn shut up in his dark
carriage and Mr Bucket shut up in HIS. Between the immeasurable
track of space beyond the little wound that has thrown the one into
the fixed sleep which jolts so heavily over the stones of the streets,
and the narrow track of blood which keeps the other in the watchful
state expressed in every hair of his head! But it is all one to both;
neither is troubled about that.

Mr Bucket sits out the procession in his own easy manner and glides
from the carriage when the opportunity he has settled with himself
arrives. He makes for Sir Leicester Dedlock's, which is at present a
sort of home to him, where he comes and goes as he likes at all hours,
where he is always welcome and made much of, where he knows the
whole establishment, and walks in an atmosphere of mysterious
greatness.

No knocking or ringing for Mr Bucket. He has caused himself to be
provided with a key and can pass in at his pleasure. As he is crossing
the hall, Mercury informs him, ‘Here's another letter for you, Mr
Bucket, come by post,’ and gives it him.

‘Another one, eh?’ says Mr Bucket.

If Mercury should chance to be possessed by any lingering curiosity as
to Mr Bucket's letters, that wary person is not the man to gratify it. Mr
Bucket looks at him as if his face were a vista of some miles in length
and he were leisurely contemplating the same.

‘Do you happen to carry a box?’ says Mr Bucket.
Unfortunately Mercury is no snuff-taker.

‘Could you fetch me a pinch from anywheres?’ says Mr Bucket.
‘Thankee. It don't matter what it is; I'm not particular as to the kind.
Thankee!’

Having leisurely helped himself from a canister borrowed from
somebody downstairs for the purpose, and having made a
considerable show of tasting it, first with one side of his nose and then
with the other, Mr Bucket, with much deliberation, pronounces it of
the right sort and goes on, letter in hand.

Now although Mr Bucket walks upstairs to the little library within the
larger one with the face of a man who receives some scores of letters
every day, it happens that much correspondence is not incidental to
his life. He is no great scribe, rather handling his pen like the pocket-
staff he carries about with him always convenient to his grasp, and
discourages correspondence with himself in others as being too artless
and direct a way of doing delicate business. Further, he often sees
damaging letters produced in evidence and has occasion to reflect that
it was a green thing to write them. For these reasons he has very little
to do with letters, either as sender or receiver. And yet he has received
a round half-dozen within the last twenty-four hours.
‘And this,’ says Mr Bucket, spreading it out on the table, ‘is in the
same hand, and consists of the same two words.’

What two words?

He turns the key in the door, ungirdles his black pocket-book (book of
fate to many), lays another letter by it, and reads, boldly written in
each, ‘Lady Dedlock.’

‘Yes, yes,’ says Mr Bucket. ‘But I could have made the money without
this anonymous information.’

Having put the letters in his book of fate and girdled it up again, he
unlocks the door just in time to admit his dinner, which is brought
upon a goodly tray with a decanter of sherry. Mr Bucket frequently
observes, in friendly circles where there is no restraint, that he likes a
toothful of your fine old brown East Inder sherry better than anything
you can offer him. Consequently he fills and empties his glass with a
smack of his lips and is proceeding with his refreshment when an idea
enters his mind.

Mr Bucket softly opens the door of communication between that room
and the next and looks in. The library is deserted, and the fire is
sinking low. Mr Bucket's eye, after taking a pigeon-flight round the
room, alights upon a table where letters are usually put as they arrive.
Several letters for Sir Leicester are upon it. Mr Bucket draws near and
examines the directions. ‘No,’ he says, ‘there's none in that hand. It's
only me as is written to. I can break it to Sir Leicester Dedlock,
Baronet, to-morrow.’

With that he returns to finish his dinner with a good appetite, and
after a light nap, is summoned into the drawing-room. Sir Leicester
has received him there these several evenings past to know whether
he has anything to report. The debilitated cousin (much exhausted by
the funeral) and Volumnia are in attendance.

Mr Bucket makes three distinctly different bows to these three people.
A bow of homage to Sir Leicester, a bow of gallantry to Volumnia, and
a bow of recognition to the debilitated Cousin, to whom it airily says,
‘YYou are a swell about town, and you know me, and I know you.’
Having distributed these little specimens of his tact, Mr Bucket rubs
his hands.

‘Have you anything new to communicate, officer?’ inquires Sir
Leicester. ‘Do you wish to hold any conversation with me in private?’

‘Why--not to-night, Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet.’
‘Because my time,’ pursues Sir Leicester, ‘is wholly at your disposal
with a view to the vindication of the outraged majesty of the law.’

Mr Bucket coughs and glances at Volumnia, rouged and necklaced, as
though he would respectfully observe, I do assure you, you're a pretty
creetur. I've seen hundreds worse looking at your time of life, I have
indeed.’

The fair Volumnia, not quite unconscious perhaps of the humanizing
influence of her charms, pauses in the writing of cocked-hat notes and
meditatively adjusts the pearl necklace. Mr Bucket prices that
decoration in his mind and thinks it as likely as not that Volumnia is
writing poetry.

Tf I have not,’ pursues Sir Leicester, ‘in the most emphatic manner,
adjured you, officer, to exercise your utmost skill in this atrocious
case, I particularly desire to take the present opportunity of rectifying
any omission I may have made. Let no expense be a consideration. I
am prepared to defray all charges. You can incur none in pursuit of
the object you have undertaken that I shall hesitate for a moment to
bear.’

Mr Bucket made Sir Leicester's bow again as a response to this
liberality.

‘My mind,’ Sir Leicester adds with a generous warmth, ‘has not, as
may be easily supposed, recovered its tone since the late diabolical
occurrence. It is not likely ever to recover its tone. But it is full of
indignation to-night after undergoing the ordeal of consigning to the
tomb the remains of a faithful, a zealous, a devoted adherent.’

Sir Leicester's voice trembles and his grey hair stirs upon his head.
Tears are in his eyes; the best part of his nature is aroused.

T declare,’ he says, I solemnly declare that until this crime is
discovered and, in the course of justice, punished, I almost feel as if
there were a stain upon my name. A gentleman who has devoted a
large portion of his life to me, a gentleman who has devoted the last
day of his life to me, a gentleman who has constantly sat at my table
and slept under my roof, goes from my house to his own, and is
struck down within an hour of his leaving my house. I cannot say but
that he may have been followed from my house, watched at my house,
even first marked because of his association with my house--which
may have suggested his possessing greater wealth and being
altogether of greater importance than his own retiring demeanour
would have indicated. If I cannot with my means and influence and
my position bring all the perpetrators of such a crime to light, I fail in
the assertion of my respect for that gentleman's memory and of my
fidelity towards one who was ever faithful to me.’

While he makes this protestation with great emotion and earnestness,
looking round the room as if he were addressing an assembly, Mr
Bucket glances at him with an observant gravity in which there might
be, but for the audacity of the thought, a touch of compassion.

The ceremony of to-day,’ continues Sir Leicester, ‘strikingly
illustrative of the respect in which my deceased friend’--he lays a
stress upon the word, for death levels all distinctions--’was held by the
flower of the land, has, I say, aggravated the shock I have received
from this most horrible and audacious crime. If it were my brother
who had committed it, I would not spare him.’

Mr Bucket looks very grave. Volumnia remarks of the deceased that
he was the trustiest and dearest person!

‘YYou must feel it as a deprivation to you, miss,’ replies Mr Bucket
soothingly, ‘no doubt. He was calculated to BE a deprivation, I'm sure
he was.’

Volumnia gives Mr Bucket to understand, in reply, that her sensitive
mind is fully made up never to get the better of it as long as she lives,
that her nerves are unstrung for ever, and that she has not the least
expectation of ever smiling again. Meanwhile she folds up a cocked
hat for that redoubtable old general at Bath, descriptive of her
melancholy condition.

‘Tt gives a start to a delicate female,’ says Mr Bucket sympathetically,
‘put it'll wear off.’

Volumnia wishes of all things to know what is doing? Whether they
are going to convict, or whatever it is, that dreadful soldier? Whether
he had any accomplices, or whatever the thing is called in the law?
And a great deal more to the like artless purpose.

‘Why you see, miss,’ returns Mr Bucket, bringing the finger into
persuasive action--and such is his natural gallantry that he had
almost said ‘my dear’--’it ain't easy to answer those questions at the
present moment. Not at the present moment. I've kept myself on this
case, Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet,’ whom Mr Bucket takes into the
conversation in right of his importance, ‘morning, noon, and night.
But for a glass or two of sherry, I don't think I could have had my
mind so much upon the stretch as it has been. I COULD answer your
questions, miss, but duty forbids it. Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet,
will very soon be made acquainted with all that has been traced. And I
hope that he may find it--Mr Bucket again looks grave--’to his
satisfaction.’

The debilitated cousin only hopes some fler'll be executed--zample.
Thinks more interest's wanted--get man hanged presentime--than get
man place ten thousand a year. Hasn't a doubt--zample--far better
hang wrong fler than no fler.

‘YOU know life, you know, sir,’ says Mr Bucket with a complimentary
twinkle of his eye and crook of his finger, ‘and you can confirm what
I've mentioned to this lady. YOU don't want to be told that from
information I have received I have gone to work. You're up to what a
lady can't be expected to be up to. Lord! Especially in your elevated
station of society, miss,’ says Mr Bucket, quite reddening at another
narrow escape from ‘my dear.’

‘The officer, Volumnia,’ observes Sir Leicester, ‘is faithful to his duty,
and perfectly right.’

Mr Bucket murmurs, ‘Glad to have the honour of your approbation,
Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet.’

In fact, Volumnia,’ proceeds Sir Leicester, ‘it is not holding up a good
model for imitation to ask the officer any such questions as you have
put to him. He is the best judge of his own responsibility; he acts
upon his responsibility. And it does not become us, who assist in
making the laws, to impede or interfere with those who carry them
into execution. Or,’ says Sir Leicester somewhat sternly, for Volumnia
was going to cut in before he had rounded his sentence, ‘or who
vindicate their outraged majesty.’

Volumnia with all humility explains that she had not merely the plea
of curiosity to urge (in common with the giddy youth of her sex in
general) but that she is perfectly dying with regret and interest for the
darling man whose loss they all deplore.

Very well, Volumnia,’ returns Sir Leicester. Then you cannot be too
discreet.’

Mr Bucket takes the opportunity of a pause to be heard again.

‘Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, I have no objections to telling this
lady, with your leave and among ourselves, that I look upon the case
as pretty well complete. It is a beautiful case--a beautiful case--and
what little is wanting to complete it, I expect to be able to supply ina
few hours.’
T am very glad indeed to hear it,’ says Sir Leicester. ‘Highly creditable
to you.’

‘Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet,’ returns Mr Bucket very seriously, 1
hope it may at one and the same time do me credit and prove
satisfactory to all. When I depict it as a beautiful case, you see, miss,’
Mr Bucket goes on, glancing gravely at Sir Leicester, ‘I mean from my
point of view. As considered from other points of view, such cases will
always involve more or less unpleasantness. Very strange things
comes to our knowledge in families, miss; bless your heart, what you
would think to be phenomenons, quite.’

Volumnia, with her innocent little scream, supposes so.

‘Aye, and even in gen-teel families, in high families, in great families,’
says Mr Bucket, again gravely eyeing Sir Leicester aside. I have had
the honour of being employed in high families before, and you have no
idea--come, I'll go so far as to say not even YOU have any idea, sir,’
this to the debilitated cousin, ‘what games goes on!’

The cousin, who has been casting sofa-pillows on his head, in a
prostration of boredom yawns, ‘Vayli,’ being the used-up for ‘very
likely.’

Sir Leicester, deeming it time to dismiss the officer, here majestically
interposes with the words, ‘Very good. Thank you!’ and also with a
wave of his hand, implying not only that there is an end of the
discourse, but that if high families fall into low habits they must take
the consequences. ‘You will not forget, officer,’ he adds with
condescension, ‘that Iam at your disposal when you please.’

Mr Bucket (still grave) inquires if to-morrow morning, now, would suit,
in case he should be as for'ard as he expects to be. Sir Leicester
replies, ‘All times are alike to me.’ Mr Bucket makes his three bows
and is withdrawing when a forgotten point occurs to him.

‘Might I ask, by the by,’ he says in a low voice, cautiously returning,
‘who posted the reward-bill on the staircase.’

T ordered it to be put up there,’ replies Sir Leicester.

‘Would it be considered a liberty, Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, if I
was to ask you why?’

‘Not at all. I chose it as a conspicuous part of the house. I think it
cannot be too prominently kept before the whole establishment. I wish
my people to be impressed with the enormity of the crime, the
determination to punish it, and the hopelessness of escape. At the
same time, officer, if you in your better knowledge of the subject see
any objection--’

Mr Bucket sees none now; the bill having been put up, had better not
be taken down. Repeating his three bows he withdraws, closing the
door on Volumnia's little scream, which is a preliminary to her
remarking that that charmingly horrible person is a perfect Blue
Chamber.

In his fondness for society and his adaptability to all grades, Mr
Bucket is presently standing before the hall-fire--bright and warm on
the early winter night--admiring Mercury.

‘Why, you're six foot two, I suppose?’ says Mr Bucket.
‘Three,’ says Mercury.

‘Are you so much? But then, you see, you're broad in proportion and
don't look it. You're not one of the weak-legged ones, you ain't. Was
you ever modelled now?’ Mr Bucket asks, conveying the expression of
an artist into the turn of his eye and head.

Mercury never was modelled.

Then you ought to be, you know,’ says Mr Bucket; ‘and a friend of
mine that you'll hear of one day as a Royal Academy sculptor would
stand something handsome to make a drawing of your proportions for
the marble. My Lady's out, ain't she?’

‘Out to dinner.’
‘Goes out pretty well every day, don't she?’
Yes.’

‘Not to be wondered at!’ says Mr Bucket. ‘Such a fine woman as her,
so handsome and so graceful and so elegant, is like a fresh lemon ona
dinner-table, ornamental wherever she goes. Was your father in the
same way of life as yourself?’

Answer in the negative.

‘Mine was,’ says Mr Bucket. ‘My father was first a page, then a
footman, then a butler, then a steward, then an inn-keeper. Lived
universally respected, and died lamented. Said with his last breath
that he considered service the most honourable part of his career, and
so it was. I've a brother in service, AND a brother- in-law. My Lady a
good temper?’
Mercury replies, ‘As good as you can expect.’

‘Ah!’ says Mr Bucket. ‘A little spoilt? A little capricious? Lord! What
can you anticipate when they're so handsome as that? And we like 'em
all the better for it, don't we?’

Mercury, with his hands in the pockets of his bright peach-blossom
small-clothes, stretches his symmetrical silk legs with the air of a man
of gallantry and can't deny it. Come the roll of wheels and a violent
ringing at the bell. ‘Talk of the angels,’ says Mr Bucket. ‘Here she is!’

The doors are thrown open, and she passes through the hall. Still very
pale, she is dressed in slight mourning and wears two beautiful
bracelets. Either their beauty or the beauty of her arms is particularly
attractive to Mr Bucket. He looks at them with an eager eye and
rattles something in his pocket--halfpence perhaps.

Noticing him at his distance, she turns an inquiring look on the other
Mercury who has brought her home.

‘Mr Bucket, my Lady.’

Mr Bucket makes a leg and comes forward, passing his familiar
demon over the region of his mouth.

‘Are you waiting to see Sir Leicester?’

‘No, my Lady, I've seen him!’

‘Have you anything to say to me?’

‘Not just at present, my Lady.’

‘Have you made any new discoveries?’

‘A few, my Lady.’

This is merely in passing. She scarcely makes a stop, and sweeps
upstairs alone. Mr Bucket, moving towards the staircase-foot, watches
her as she goes up the steps the old man came down to his grave,
past murderous groups of statuary repeated with their shadowy
weapons on the wall, past the printed bill, which she looks at going

by, out of view.

‘She's a lovely woman, too, she really is,’ says Mr Bucket, coming back
to Mercury. ‘Don't look quite healthy though.’
Is not quite healthy, Mercury informs him. Suffers much from
headaches.

Really? That's a pity! Walking, Mr Bucket would recommend for that.
Well, she tries walking, Mercury rejoins. Walks sometimes for two

hours when she has them bad. By night, too.

‘Are you sure you're quite so much as six foot three?’ asks Mr Bucket.
‘Begging your pardon for interrupting you a moment?’

Not a doubt about it.
‘You're so well put together that I shouldn't have thought it. But the
household troops, though considered fine men, are built so straggling.

Walks by night, does she? When it's moonlight, though?’

Oh, yes. When it's moonlight! Of course. Oh, of course! Conversational
and acquiescent on both sides.

‘IT suppose you ain't in the habit of walking yourself?’ says Mr Bucket.
‘Not much time for it, I should say?’

Besides which, Mercury don't like it. Prefers carriage exercise.

‘To be sure,’ says Mr Bucket. ‘That makes a difference. Now I think of
it,’ says Mr Bucket, warming his hands and looking pleasantly at the
blaze, ‘she went out walking the very night of this business.’

‘To be sure she did! I let her into the garden over the way.’

‘And left her there. Certainly you did. I saw you doing it.’

T didn't see YOU,’ says Mercury.

T was rather in a hurry,’ returns Mr Bucket, ‘for I was going to visit a
aunt of mine that lives at Chelsea--next door but two to the old
original Bun House--ninety year old the old lady is, a single woman,
and got a little property. Yes, I chanced to be passing at the time. Let's
see. What time might it be? It wasn't ten.’

‘Half-past nine.’

You're right. So it was. And if I don't deceive myself, my Lady was
muffled in a loose black mantle, with a deep fringe to it?’

‘Of course she was.’
Of course she was. Mr Bucket must return to a little work he has to
get on with upstairs, but he must shake hands with Mercury in
acknowledgment of his agreeable conversation, and will he--this is all
he asks--will he, when he has a leisure half-hour, think of bestowing
it on that Royal Academy sculptor, for the advantage of both parties?
CHAPTER LIV - Springing a Mine

Refreshed by sleep, Mr Bucket rises betimes in the morning and
prepares for a field-day. Smartened up by the aid of a clean shirt and
a wet hairbrush, with which instrument, on occasions of ceremony, he
lubricates such thin locks as remain to him after his life of severe
study, Mr Bucket lays in a breakfast of two mutton chops as a
foundation to work upon, together with tea, eggs, toast, and
marmalade on a corresponding scale. Having much enjoyed these
strengthening matters and having held subtle conference with his
familiar demon, he confidently instructs Mercury ‘just to mention
quietly to Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, that whenever he's ready for
me, I'm ready for him.’ A gracious message being returned that Sir
Leicester will expedite his dressing and join Mr Bucket in the library
within ten minutes, Mr Bucket repairs to that apartment and stands
before the fire with his finger on his chin, looking at the blazing coals.

Thoughtful Mr Bucket is, as a man may be with weighty work to do,
but composed, sure, confident. From the expression of his face he
might be a famous whist-player for a large stake--say a hundred
guineas certain--with the game in his hand, but with a high
reputation involved in his playing his hand out to the last card in a
masterly way. Not in the least anxious or disturbed is Mr Bucket when
Sir Leicester appears, but he eyes the baronet aside as he comes
slowly to his easy-chair with that observant gravity of yesterday in
which there might have been yesterday, but for the audacity of the
idea, a touch of compassion.

T am sorry to have kept you waiting, officer, but I am rather later than
my usual hour this morning. I am not well. The agitation and the
indignation from which I have recently suffered have been too much
for me. I am _ subject to--gout’--Sir Leicester was going to say
indisposition and would have said it to anybody else, but Mr Bucket
palpably knows all about it--’and recent circumstances have brought
it on.’

As he takes his seat with some difficulty and with an air of pain, Mr
Bucket draws a little nearer, standing with one of his large hands on
the library-table.

T am not aware, officer,’ Sir Leicester observes; raising his eyes to his
face, ‘whether you wish us to be alone, but that is entirely as you
please. If you do, well and good. If not, Miss Dedlock would be
interested--’

‘Why, Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet,’ returns Mr Bucket with his
head persuasively on one side and his forefinger pendant at one ear
like an earring, ‘we can't be too private just at present. You will
presently see that we can't be too private. A lady, under the
circumstances, and especially in Miss Dedlock's elevated station of
society, can't but be agreeable to me, but speaking without a view to
myself, I will take the liberty of assuring you that I know we can't be
too private.’

‘That is enough.’

‘So much so, Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet,’ Mr Bucket resumes,
‘that I was on the point of asking your permission to turn the key in
the door.’

‘By all means.’ Mr Bucket skilfully and softly takes that precaution,
stooping on his knee for a moment from mere force of habit so to
adjust the key in the lock as that no one shall peep in from the
outerside.

‘Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, I mentioned yesterday evening that I
wanted but a very little to complete this case. I have now completed it
and collected proof against the person who did this crime.’

‘Against the soldier?’
‘No, Sir Leicester Dedlock; not the soldier.’
Sir Leicester looks astounded and inquires, ‘Is the man in custody?’

Mr Bucket tells him, after a pause, It was a woman.’ Sir Leicester
leans back in his chair, and breathlessly ejaculates, ‘Good heaven!’

‘Now, Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet,’ Mr Bucket begins, standing over
him with one hand spread out on the library-table and the forefinger
of the other in impressive use, ‘it's my duty to prepare you for a train
of circumstances that may, and I go so far as to say that will, give you
a shock. But Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, you are a gentleman, and
I know what a gentleman is and what a gentleman is capable of. A
gentleman can bear a shock when it must come, boldly and steadily. A
gentleman can make up his mind to stand up against almost any
blow. Why, take yourself, Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet. If there's a
blow to be inflicted on you, you naturally think of your family. You ask
yourself, how would all them ancestors of yours, away to Julius
Caesar--not to go beyond him at present--have borne that blow; you
remember scores of them that would have borne it well; and you bear
it well on their accounts, and to maintain the family credit. That's the
way you argue, and that's the way you act, Sir Leicester Dedlock,
Baronet.’
Sir Leicester, leaning back in his chair and grasping the elbows, sits
looking at him with a stony face.

‘Now, Sir Leicester Dedlock,’ proceeds Mr Bucket, ‘thus preparing you,
let me beg of you not to trouble your mind for a moment as to
anything having come to MY knowledge. I know so much about so
many characters, high and low, that a piece of information more or
less don't signify a straw. I don't suppose there's a move on the board
that would surprise ME, and as to this or that move having taken
place, why my knowing it is no odds at all, any possible move
whatever (provided it's in a wrong direction) being a probable move
according to my experience. Therefore, what I say to you, Sir Leicester
Dedlock, Baronet, is, don't you go and let yourself be put out of the
way because of my knowing anything of your family affairs.’

T thank you for your preparation,’ returns Sir Leicester after a silence,
without moving hand, foot, or feature, ‘which I hope is not necessary;
though I give it credit for being well intended. Be so good as to go on.
Also’--Sir Leicester seems to shrink in the shadow of his figure--’also,
to take a seat, if you have no objection.’

None at all. Mr Bucket brings a chair and diminishes his shadow.
‘Now, Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, with this short preface I come to
the point. Lady Dedlock--’

Sir Leicester raises himself in his seat and stares at him fiercely. Mr
Bucket brings the finger into play as an emollient.

‘Lady Dedlock, you see she's universally admired. That's what her
ladyship is; she's universally admired,’ says Mr Bucket.

T would greatly prefer, officer,’ Sir Leicester returns stiffly, ‘my Lady's
name being entirely omitted from this discussion.’

‘So would I, Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, but--it's impossible.’
Impossible?’
Mr Bucket shakes his relentless head.

‘Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, it's altogether impossible. What I have
got to say is about her ladyship. She is the pivot it all turns on.’

‘Officer,’ retorts Sir Leicester with a fiery eye and a quivering lip, ‘you
know your duty. Do your duty, but be careful not to overstep it. I
would not suffer it. I would not endure it. You bring my Lady's name
into this communication upon your responsibility--upon your
responsibility. My Lady's name is not a name for common persons to
trifle with!’

‘Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, I say what I must say, and no more.’

T hope it may prove so. Very well. Go on. Go on, sir!’ Glancing at the
angry eyes which now avoid him and at the angry figure trembling
from head to foot, yet striving to be still, Mr Bucket feels his way with
his forefinger and in a low voice proceeds.

‘Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, it becomes my duty to tell you that the
deceased Mr Tulkinghorn long entertained mistrusts and suspicions
of Lady Dedlock.’

Tf he had dared to breathe them to me, sir--which he never did--I
would have killed him myself!’ exclaims Sir Leicester, striking his
hand upon the table. But in the very heat and fury of the act he stops,
fixed by the knowing eyes of Mr Bucket, whose forefinger is slowly
going and who, with mingled confidence and patience, shakes his
head.

‘Sir Leicester Dedlock, the deceased Mr Tulkinghorn was deep and
close, and what he fully had in his mind in the very beginning I can't
quite take upon myself to say. But I know from his lips that he long
ago suspected Lady Dedlock of having discovered, through the sight of
some handwriting--in this very house, and when you yourself, Sir
Leicester Dedlock, were present--the existence, in great poverty, of a
certain person who had been her lover before you courted her and
who ought to have been her husband.’ Mr Bucket stops and
deliberately repeats, ‘Ought to have been her husband, not a doubt
about it. I know from his lips that when that person soon afterwards
died, he suspected Lady Dedlock of visiting his wretched lodging and
his wretched grave, alone and in secret. I know from my own inquiries
and through my eyes and ears that Lady Dedlock did make such visit
in the dress of her own maid, for the deceased Mr Tulkinghorn
employed me to reckon up her ladyship--if you'll excuse my making
use of the term we commonly employ--and I reckoned her up, so far,
completely. I confronted the maid in the chambers in Lincoln's Inn
Fields with a witness who had been Lady Dedlock's guide, and there
couldn't be the shadow of a doubt that she had worn the young
woman's dress, unknown to her. Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, I did
endeavour to pave the way a little towards these unpleasant
disclosures yesterday by saying that very strange things happened
even in high families sometimes. All this, and more, has happened in
your own family, and to and through your own Lady. It's my belief
that the deceased Mr Tulkinghorn followed up these inquiries to the
hour of his death and that he and Lady Dedlock even had bad blood
between them upon the matter that very night. Now, only you put that
to Lady Dedlock, Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, and ask her ladyship
whether, even after he had left here, she didn't go down to his
chambers with the intention of saying something further to him,
dressed in a loose black mantle with a deep fringe to it.’

Sir Leicester sits like a statue, gazing at the cruel finger that is
probing the life-blood of his heart.

‘You put that to her ladyship, Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, from me,
Inspector Bucket of the Detective. And if her ladyship makes any
difficulty about admitting of it, you tell her that it's no use, that
Inspector Bucket knows it and knows that she passed the soldier as
you called him (though he's not in the army now) and knows that she
knows she passed him on the staircase. Now, Sir Leicester Dedlock,
Baronet, why do I relate all this?’

Sir Leicester, who has covered his face with his hands, uttering a
single groan, requests him to pause for a moment. By and by he takes
his hands away, and so preserves his dignity and outward calmness,
though there is no more colour in his face than in his white hair, that
Mr Bucket is a little awed by him. Something frozen and fixed is upon
his manner, over and above its usual shell of haughtiness, and Mr
Bucket soon detects an unusual slowness in his speech, with now and
then a curious trouble in beginning, which occasions him to utter
inarticulate sounds. With such sounds he now breaks silence, soon,
however, controlling himself to say that he does not comprehend why
a gentleman so faithful and zealous as the late Mr Tulkinghorn should
have communicated to him nothing of this painful, this distressing,
this unlooked-for, this overwhelming, this incredible intelligence.

‘Again, Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet,’ returns Mr Bucket, ‘put it to
her ladyship to clear that up. Put it to her ladyship, if you think it
right, from Inspector Bucket of the Detective. You'll find, or I'm much
mistaken, that the deceased Mr Tulkinghorn had the intention of
communicating the whole to you as soon as he considered it ripe, and
further, that he had given her ladyship so to understand. Why, he
might have been going to reveal it the very morning when I examined
the body! You don't know what I'm going to say and do five minutes
from this present time, Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet; and supposing
I was to be picked off now, you might wonder why I hadn't done it,
don't you see?’

True. Sir Leicester, avoiding, with some trouble those obtrusive
sounds, says, ‘True.’ At this juncture a considerable noise of voices is
heard in the hall. Mr Bucket, after listening, goes to the library-door,
softly unlocks and opens it, and listens again. Then he draws in his
head and whispers hurriedly but composedly, ‘Sir Leicester Dedlock,
Baronet, this unfortunate family affair has taken air, as I expected it
might, the deceased Mr Tulkinghorn being cut down so sudden. The
chance to hush it is to let in these people now in a wrangle with your
footmen. Would you mind sitting quiet--on the family account--while I
reckon 'em up? And would you just throw in a nod when I seem to ask
you for it?’

Sir Leicester indistinctly answers, ‘Officer. The best you can, the best
you can!’ and Mr Bucket, with a nod and a sagacious crook of the
forefinger, slips down into the hall, where the voices quickly die away.
He is not long in returning; a few paces ahead of Mercury and a
brother deity also powdered and in peach-blossomed smalls, who bear
between them a chair in which is an incapable old man. Another man
and two women come behind. Directing the pitching of the chair in an
affable and easy manner, Mr Bucket dismisses the Mercuries and
locks the door again. Sir Leicester looks on at this invasion of the
sacred precincts with an icy stare.

‘Now, perhaps you may know me, ladies and gentlemen,’ says Mr
Bucket in a confidential voice. I am Inspector Bucket of the Detective,
I am; and this,’ producing the tip of his convenient little staff from his
breast-pocket, ‘is my authority. Now, you wanted to see Sir Leicester
Dedlock, Baronet. Well! You do see him, and mind you, it ain't every
one as is admitted to that honour. Your name, old gentleman, is
Smallweed; that's what your name is; I know it well.’

‘Well, and you never heard any harm of it!’ cries Mr Smallweed in a
shrill loud voice.

‘You don't happen to know why they killed the pig, do you?’ retorts Mr
Bucket with a steadfast look, but without loss of temper.

Nol’

‘Why, they killed him,’ says Mr Bucket, ‘on account of his having so
much cheek. Don't YOU get into the same position, because it isn't
worthy of you. You ain't in the habit of conversing with a deaf person,
are you?’

‘Yes,’ snarls Mr Smallweed, ‘my wife's deaf.’

That accounts for your pitching your voice so high. But as she ain't
here; just pitch it an octave or two lower, will you, and I'll not only be
obliged to you, but it'll do you more credit,’ says Mr Bucket. ‘This
other gentleman is in the preaching line, I think?’

‘Name of Chadband,’ Mr Smallweed puts in, speaking henceforth in a
much lower key.
‘Once had a friend and brother serjeant of the same name,’ says Mr
Bucket, offering his hand, ‘and consequently feel a liking for it. Mrs
Chadband, no doubt?’

‘And Mrs Snagsby,’ Mr Smallweed introduces.

‘Husband a law-stationer and a friend of my own,’ says Mr Bucket.
‘Love him like a brother! Now, what's up?’

‘Do you mean what business have we come upon?’ Mr Smallweed
asks, a little dashed by the suddenness of this turn.

‘Ah! You know what I mean. Let us hear what it's all about in presence
of Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet. Come.’

Mr Smallweed, beckoning Mr Chadband, takes a moment's counsel
with him in a whisper. Mr Chadband, expressing a considerable
amount of oil from the pores of his forehead and the palms of his
hands, says aloud, ‘Yes. You first!’ and retires to his former place.

T was the client and friend of Mr Tulkinghorn,’ pipes Grandfather
Smallweed then; T did business with him. I was useful to him, and he
was useful to me. Krook, dead and gone, was my brother-in-law. He
was own brother to a brimstone magpie--leastways Mrs Smallweed. I
come into Krook's property. I examined all his papers and all his
effects. They was all dug out under my eyes. There was a bundle of
letters belonging to a dead and gone lodger as was hid away at the
back of a shelf in the side of Lady Jane's bed--his cat's bed. He hid all
manner of things away, everywheres. Mr Tulkinghorn wanted 'em and
got 'em, but I looked 'em over first. I'm a man of business, and I took a
squint at 'em. They was letters from the lodger's sweetheart, and she
signed Honoria. Dear me, that's not a common name, Honoria, is it?
There's no lady in this house that signs Honoria is there? Oh, no, I
don't think so! Oh, no, I don't think so! And not in the same hand,
perhaps? Oh, no, I don't think so!’

Here Mr Smallweed, seized with a fit of coughing in the midst of his
triumph, breaks off to ejaculate, ‘Oh, dear me! Oh, Lord! I'm shaken
all to pieces!’

‘Now, when you're ready,’ says Mr Bucket after awaiting his recovery,
‘to come to anything that concerns Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet,
here the gentleman sits, you know.’

‘Haven't I come to it, Mr Bucket?’ cries Grandfather Smallweed. ‘Isn't
the gentleman concerned yet? Not with Captain Hawdon, and his ever
affectionate Honoria, and their child into the bargain? Come, then, I
want to know where those letters are. That concerns me, if it don't
concern Sir Leicester Dedlock. I will know where they are. I won't have
‘em disappear so quietly. I handed 'em over to my friend and solicitor,
Mr Tulkinghorn, not to anybody else.’

‘Why, he paid you for them, you know, and handsome too,’ says Mr
Bucket.

T don't care for that. I want to know who's got 'em. And I tell you what
we want--what we all here want, Mr Bucket. We want more
painstaking and search-making into this murder. We know where the
interest and the motive was, and you have not done enough. If George
the vagabond dragoon had any hand in it, he was only an accomplice,
and was set on. You know what I mean as well as any man.’

‘Now I tell you what,’ says Mr Bucket, instantaneously altering his
manner, coming close to him, and communicating an extraordinary
fascination to the forefinger, I am damned if I am a-going to have my
case spoilt, or interfered with, or anticipated by so much as half a
second of time by any human being in creation. YOU want more
painstaking and search-making! YOU do? Do you see this hand, and
do you think that I don't know the right time to stretch it out and put
it on the arm that fired that shot?’

Such is the dread power of the man, and so terribly evident it is that
he makes no idle boast, that Mr Smallweed begins to apologize. Mr
Bucket, dismissing his sudden anger, checks him.

‘The advice I give you is, don't you trouble your head about the
murder. That's my affair. You keep half an eye on the newspapers,
and I shouldn't wonder if you was to read something about it before
long, if you look sharp. I know my business, and that's all I've got to
say to you on that subject. Now about those letters. You want to know
who's got 'em. I don't mind telling you. I have got 'em. Is that the
packet?’

Mr Smallweed looks, with greedy eyes, at the little bundle Mr Bucket
produces from a mysterious part of his coat, and identifies it as the
same.

‘What have you got to say next?’ asks Mr Bucket. ‘Now, don't open
your mouth too wide, because you don't look handsome when you do
it.’

T want five hundred pound.’

‘No, you don't; you mean fifty,’ says Mr Bucket humorously.

It appears, however, that Mr Smallweed means five hundred.
‘That is, I am deputed by Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, to consider
(without admitting or promising anything) this bit of business,’ says
Mr Bucket--Sir Leicester mechanically bows his head--’and you ask
me to consider a proposal of five hundred pounds. Why, it's an
unreasonable proposal! Two fifty would be bad enough, but better
than that. Hadn't you better say two fifty?’

Mr Smallweed is quite clear that he had better not.

‘Then,’ says Mr Bucket, ‘let's hear Mr Chadband. Lord! Many a time
I've heard my old fellow-serjeant of that name; and a moderate man he
was in all respects, as ever I come across!’

Thus invited, Mr Chadband steps forth, and after a little sleek smiling
and a little oil-grinding with the palms of his hands, delivers himself
as follows, ‘My friends, we are now--Rachael, my wife, and I--in the
mansions of the rich and great. Why are we now in the mansions of
the rich and great, my friends? Is it because we are invited? Because
we are bidden to feast with them, because we are bidden to rejoice
with them, because we are bidden to play the lute with them, because
we are bidden to dance with them? No. Then why are we here, my
friends? Air we in possession of a sinful secret, and do we require
corn, and wine, and oil, or what is much the same thing, money, for
the keeping thereof? Probably so, my friends.’

‘You're a man of business, you are,’ returns Mr Bucket, very attentive,
‘and consequently you're going on to mention what the nature of your
secret is. You are right. You couldn't do better.’

‘Let us then, my brother, in a spirit of love,’ says Mr Chadband with a
cunning eye, ‘proceed unto it. Rachael, my wife, advance!’

Mrs Chadband, more than ready, so advances as to jostle her
husband into the background and confronts Mr Bucket with a hard,
frowning smile.

‘Since you want to know what we know,’ says she, T'll tell you. I
helped to bring up Miss Hawdon, her ladyship's daughter. I was in the
service of her ladyship's sister, who was very sensitive to the disgrace
her ladyship brought upon her, and gave out, even to her ladyship,
that the child was dead--she WAS very nearly so--when she was born.
But she's alive, and I know her.’ With these words, and a laugh, and
laying a bitter stress on the word ‘ladyship,’ Mrs Chadband folds her
arms and looks implacably at Mr Bucket.

T suppose now,’ returns that officer, ‘YOU will be expecting a twenty-
pound note or a present of about that figure?’
Mrs Chadband merely laughs and contemptuously tells him he can
‘offer’ twenty pence.

‘My friend the law-stationer's good lady, over there,’ says Mr Bucket,
luring Mrs Snagsby forward with the finger. ‘What may YOUR game
be, ma'am?’

Mrs Snagsby is at first prevented, by tears and lamentations, from
stating the nature of her game, but by degrees it confusedly comes to
light that she is a woman overwhelmed with injuries and wrongs,
whom Mr Snagsby has habitually deceived, abandoned, and sought to
keep in darkness, and whose chief comfort, under her afflictions, has
been the sympathy of the late Mr Tulkinghorn, who showed so much
commiseration for her on one occasion of his calling in Cook's Court
in the absence of her perjured husband that she has of late habitually
carried to him all her woes. Everybody it appears, the present
company excepted, has plotted against Mrs Snagsby's peace. There is
Mr Guppy, clerk to Kenge and Carboy, who was at first as open as the
sun at noon, but who suddenly shut up as close as midnight, under
the influence--no doubt--of Mr Snagsby's suborning and tampering.
There is Mr Weevle, friend of Mr Guppy, who lived mysteriously up a
court, owing to the like coherent causes. There was Krook, deceased;
there was Nimrod, deceased; and there was Jo, deceased; and they
were ‘all in it.’ In what, Mrs Snagsby does not with particularity
express, but she knows that Jo was Mr Snagsby's son, ‘as well as if a
trumpet had spoken it,’ and she followed Mr Snagsby when he went
on his last visit to the boy, and if he was not his son why did he go?
The one occupation of her life has been, for some time back, to follow
Mr Snagsby to and fro, and up and down, and to piece suspicious
circumstances together--and every circumstance that has happened
has been most suspicious; and in this way she has pursued her object
of detecting and confounding her false husband, night and day. Thus
did it come to pass that she brought the Chadbands and Mr
Tulkinghorn together, and conferred with Mr Tulkinghorn on the
change in Mr Guppy, and helped to turn up the circumstances in
which the present company are interested, casually, by the wayside,
being still and ever on the great high road that is to terminate in Mr
Snagsby's full exposure and a matrimonial separation. All this, Mrs
Snagsby, as an injured woman, and the friend of Mrs Chadband, and
the follower of Mr Chadband, and the mourner of the late Mr
Tulkinghorn, is here to certify under the seal of confidence, with every
possible confusion and involvement possible and impossible, having
no pecuniary motive whatever, no scheme or project but the one
mentioned, and bringing here, and taking everywhere, her own dense
atmosphere of dust, arising from the ceaseless working of her mill of
jealousy.
While this exordium is in hand--and it takes some time--Mr Bucket,
who has seen through the transparency of Mrs Snagsby's vinegar at a
glance, confers with his familiar demon and bestows his shrewd
attention on the Chadbands and Mr Smallweed. Sir Leicester Dedlock
remains immovable, with the same icy surface upon him, except that
he once or twice looks towards Mr Bucket, as relying on that officer
alone of all mankind.

Very good,’ says Mr Bucket. ‘Now I understand you, you know, and
being deputed by Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, to look into this little
matter,’ again Sir Leicester mechanically bows in confirmation of the
statement, ‘can give it my fair and full attention. Now I won't allude to
conspiring to extort money or anything of that sort, because we are
men and women of the world here, and our object is to make things
pleasant. But I tell you what I DO wonder at; I am surprised that you
should think of making a noise below in the hall. It was so opposed to
your interests. That's what I look at.’

‘We wanted to get in,’ pleads Mr Smallweed.

‘Why, of course you wanted to get in,’ Mr Bucket asserts with
cheerfulness; ‘but for a old gentleman at your time of life--what I call
truly venerable, mind you!--with his wits sharpened, as I have no
doubt they are, by the loss of the use of his limbs, which occasions all
his animation to mount up into his head, not to consider that if he
don't keep such a business as the present as close as possible it can't
be worth a mag to him, is so curious! You see your temper got the
better of you; that's where you lost ground,’ says Mr Bucket in an
argumentative and friendly way.

T only said I wouldn't go without one of the servants came up to Sir
Leicester Dedlock,’ returns Mr Smallweed.

That's it! That's where your temper got the better of you. Now, you
keep it under another time and you'll make money by it. Shall I ring
for them to carry you down?’

‘When are we to hear more of this?’ Mrs Chadband sternly demands.
‘Bless your heart for a true woman! Always curious, your delightful
sex is!’ replies Mr Bucket with gallantry. ‘I shall have the pleasure of
giving you a call to-morrow or next day--not forgetting Mr Smallweed
and his proposal of two fifty.’

Five hundred!’ exclaims Mr Smallweed.

‘All right! Nominally five hundred.’ Mr Bucket has his hand on the
bell-rope. ‘SHALL I wish you good day for the present on the part of
myself and the gentleman of the house?’ he asks in an insinuating
tone.

Nobody having the hardihood to object to his doing so, he does it, and
the party retire as they came up. Mr Bucket follows them to the door,
and returning, says with an air of serious business, ‘Sir Leicester
Dedlock, Baronet, it's for you to consider whether or not to buy this
up. I should recommend, on the whole, it's being bought up myself;
and I think it may be bought pretty cheap. You see, that little pickled
cowcumber of a Mrs Snagsby has been used by all sides of the
speculation and has done a deal more harm in bringing odds and
ends together than if she had meant it. Mr Tulkinghorn, deceased, he
held all these horses in his hand and could have drove 'em his own
way, I haven't a doubt; but he was fetched off the box head-foremost,
and now they have got their legs over the traces, and are all dragging
and pulling their own ways. So it is, and such is life. The cat's away,
and the mice they play; the frost breaks up, and the water runs. Now,
with regard to the party to be apprehended.’

Sir Leicester seems to wake, though his eyes have been wide open,
and he looks intently at Mr Bucket as Mr Bucket refers to his watch.

The party to be apprehended is now in this house,’ proceeds Mr
Bucket, putting up his watch with a steady hand and with rising
spirits, ‘and I'm about to take her into custody in your presence. Sir
Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, don't you say a word nor yet stir. There'll
be no noise and no disturbance at all. I'll come back in the course of
the evening, if agreeable to you, and endeavour to meet your wishes
respecting this unfortunate family matter and the nobbiest way of
keeping it quiet. Now, Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, don't you be
nervous on account of the apprehension at present coming off. You
shall see the whole case clear, from first to last.’

Mr Bucket rings, goes to the door, briefly whispers Mercury, shuts the
door, and stands behind it with his arms folded. After a suspense of a
minute or two the door slowly opens and a Frenchwoman enters.
Mademoiselle Hortense.

The moment she is in the room Mr Bucket claps the door to and puts
his back against it. The suddenness of the noise occasions her to
turn, and then for the first time she sees Sir Leicester Dedlock in his
chair.

T ask you pardon,’ she mutters hurriedly. ‘They tell me there was no
one here.’

Her step towards the door brings her front to front with Mr Bucket.
Suddenly a spasm shoots across her face and she turns deadly pale.
‘This is my lodger, Sir Leicester Dedlock,’ says Mr Bucket, nodding at
her. ‘This foreign young woman has been my lodger for some weeks
back.’

‘What do Sir Leicester care for that, you think, my angel?’ returns
mademoiselle in a jocular strain.

‘Why, my angel,’ returns Mr Bucket, ‘we shall see.’

Mademoiselle Hortense eyes him with a scowl upon her tight face,
which gradually changes into a smile of scorn, ‘You are very
mysterieuse. Are you drunk?’

‘Tolerable sober, my angel,’ returns Mr Bucket.

IT come from arriving at this so detestable house with your wife. Your
wife have left me since some minutes. They tell me downstairs that
your wife is here. I come here, and your wife is not here. What is the
intention of this fool's play, say then?’ mademoiselle demands, with
her arms composedly crossed, but with something in her dark cheek
beating like a clock.

Mr Bucket merely shakes the finger at her.

‘Ah, my God, you are an unhappy idiot!’ cries mademoiselle with a
toss of her head and a laugh. ‘Leave me to pass downstairs, great pig.’
With a stamp of her foot and a menace.

‘Now, mademoiselle,’ says Mr Bucket in a cool determined way, ‘you go
and sit down upon that sofy.’

T will not sit down upon nothing,’ she replies with a shower of nods.

‘Now, mademoiselle,’ repeats Mr Bucket, making no demonstration
except with the finger, ‘you sit down upon that sofy.’

‘Why?’

‘Because I take you into custody on a charge of murder, and you don't
need to be told it. Now, I want to be polite to one of your sex and a
foreigner if I can. If I can't, I must be rough, and there's rougher ones
outside. What I am to be depends on you. So I recommend you, as a
friend, afore another half a blessed moment has passed over your
head, to go and sit down upon that sofy.’

Mademoiselle complies, saying in a concentrated voice while that
something in her cheek beats fast and hard, ‘You are a devil.’
‘Now, you see,’ Mr Bucket proceeds approvingly, ‘you're comfortable
and conducting yourself as I should expect a foreign young woman of
your sense to do. So I'll give you a piece of advice, and it's this, don't
you talk too much. You're not expected to say anything here, and you
can't keep too quiet a tongue in your head. In short, the less you
PARLAY, the better, you know.’ Mr Bucket is very complacent over
this French explanation.

Mademoiselle, with that tigerish expansion of the mouth and her
black eyes darting fire upon him, sits upright on the sofa in a rigid
state, with her hands clenched--and her feet too, one might suppose--
muttering, ‘Oh, you Bucket, you are a devil!’ ‘Now, Sir Leicester
Dedlock, Baronet,’ says Mr Bucket, and from this time forth the finger
never rests, ‘this young woman, my lodger, was her ladyship's maid at
the time I have mentioned to you; and this young woman, besides
being extraordinary vehement and passionate against her ladyship
after being discharged--’

‘Lie!’ cries mademoiselle. IT discharge myself.’

‘Now, why don't you take my advice?’ returns Mr Bucket in an
impressive, almost in an imploring, tone. ‘I’m surprised at the
indiscreetness you commit. You'll say something that'll be used
against you, you know. You're sure to come to it. Never you mind
what I say till it's given in evidence. It is not addressed to you.’

‘Discharge, too,’ cries mademoiselle furiously, ‘by her ladyship! Eh, my
faith, a pretty ladyship! Why, I r-r-r-ruin my character by remaining
with a ladyship so infame!’

Upon my soul I wonder at you!’ Mr Bucket remonstrates. I thought
the French were a polite nation, I did, really. Yet to hear a female
going on like that before Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet!’

‘He is a poor abused!’ cries mademoiselle. ‘I spit upon his house, upon
his name, upon his imbecility,’ all of which she makes the carpet
represent. ‘Oh, that he is a great man! Oh, yes, superb! Oh, heaven!
Bah!’

‘Well, Sir Leicester Dedlock,’ proceeds Mr Bucket, ‘this intemperate
foreigner also angrily took it into her head that she had established a
claim upon Mr Tulkinghorn, deceased, by attending on the occasion I
told you of at his chambers, though she was liberally paid for her time
and trouble.’

‘Lie!’ cries mademoiselle. T ref-use his money all togezzer.’
Tf you WILL PARLAY, you know,’ says Mr Bucket parenthetically, ‘you
must take the consequences. Now, whether she became my lodger, Sir
Leicester Dedlock, with any deliberate intention then of doing this
deed and blinding me, I give no opinion on; but she lived in my house
in that capacity at the time that she was hovering about the chambers
of the deceased Mr Tulkinghorn with a view to a wrangle, and likewise
persecuting and half frightening the life out of an unfortunate
stationer.’

‘Lie!’ cries mademoiselle. ‘All lie!’

‘The murder was committed, Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, and you
know under what circumstances. Now, I beg of you to follow me close
with your attention for a minute or two. I was sent for, and the case
was entrusted to me. I examined the place, and the body, and the
papers, and everything. From information I received (from a clerk in
the same house) I took George into custody as having been seen
hanging about there on the night, and at very nigh the time of the
murder, also as having been overheard in high words with the
deceased on former occasions--even threatening him, as the witness
made out. If you ask me, Sir Leicester Dedlock, whether from the first
I believed George to be the murderer, I tell you candidly no, but he
might be, notwithstanding, and there was enough against him to
make it my duty to take him and get him kept under remand. Now,
observe!’

As Mr Bucket bends forward in some excitement--for him--and
inaugurates what he is going to say with one ghostly beat of his
forefinger in the air, Mademoiselle Hortense fixes her black eyes upon
him with a dark frown and sets her dry lips closely and firmly
together.

T went home, Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, at night and found this
young woman having supper with my wife, Mrs Bucket. She had made
a mighty show of being fond of Mrs Bucket from her first offering
herself as our lodger, but that night she made more than ever--in fact,
overdid it. Likewise she overdid her respect, and all that, for the
lamented memory of the deceased Mr Tulkinghorn. By the living Lord
it flashed upon me, as I sat opposite to her at the table and saw her
with a knife in her hand, that she had done it!’

Mademoiselle is hardly audible in straining through her teeth and lips
the words, ‘You are a devil.’

‘Now where,’ pursues Mr Bucket, ‘had she been on the night of the
murder? She had been to the theayter. (She really was there, I have
since found, both before the deed and after it.) I knew I had an artful
customer to deal with and that proof would be very difficult; and I laid
a trap for her--such a trap as I never laid yet, and such a venture as I
never made yet. I worked it out in my mind while I was talking to her
at supper. When I went upstairs to bed, our house being small and
this young woman's ears sharp, I stuffed the sheet into Mrs Bucket's
mouth that she shouldn't say a word of surprise and told her all about
it. My dear, don't you give your mind to that again, or I shall link your
feet together at the ankles.’ Mr Bucket, breaking off, has made a
noiseless descent upon mademoiselle and laid his heavy hand upon
her shoulder.

‘What is the matter with you now?’ she asks him.

‘Don't you think any more,’ returns Mr Bucket with admonitory finger,
‘of throwing yourself out of window. That's what's the matter with me.
Come! Just take my arm. You needn't get up; I'll sit down by you. Now
take my arm, will you? I'm a married man, you know; you're
acquainted with my wife. Just take my arm.’

Vainly endeavouring to moisten those dry lips, with a painful sound
she struggles with herself and complies.

‘Now we're all right again. Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, this case
could never have been the case it is but for Mrs Bucket, who is a
woman in fifty thousand--in a hundred and fifty thousand! To throw
this young woman off her guard, I have never set foot in our house
since, though I've communicated with Mrs Bucket in the baker's
loaves and in the milk as often as required. My whispered words to
Mrs Bucket when she had the sheet in her mouth were, 'My dear, can
you throw her off continually with natural accounts of my suspicions
against George, and this, and that, and t'other? Can you do without
rest and keep watch upon her night and day? Can you undertake to
say, 'She shall do nothing without my knowledge, she shall be my
prisoner without suspecting it, she shall no more escape from me than
from death, and her life shall be my life, and her soul my soul, till I
have got her, if she did this murder?’ Mrs Bucket says to me, as well
as she could speak on account of the sheet, 'Bucket, I can!' And she
has acted up to it glorious!’

‘Lies!’ mademoiselle interposes. ‘All lies, my friend!’

‘Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, how did my calculations come out
under these circumstances? When I calculated that this impetuous
young woman would overdo it in new directions, was I wrong or right?
I was right. What does she try to do? Don't let it give you a turn? To
throw the murder on her ladyship.’

Sir Leicester rises from his chair and staggers down again.
‘And she got encouragement in it from hearing that I was always here,
which was done a-purpose. Now, open that pocket-book of mine, Sir
Leicester Dedlock, if I may take the liberty of throwing it towards you,
and look at the letters sent to me, each with the two words 'Lady
Dedlock' in it. Open the one directed to yourself, which I stopped this
very morning, and read the three words 'Lady Dedlock, Murderess' in
it. These letters have been falling about like a shower of lady-birds.
What do you say now to Mrs Bucket, from her spy-place having seen
them all ‘written by this young woman? What do you say to Mrs
Bucket having, within this half- hour, secured the corresponding ink
and paper, fellow half-sheets and what not? What do you say to Mrs
Bucket having watched the posting of 'em every one by this young
woman, Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet?’ Mr Bucket asks, triumphant
in his admiration of his lady's genius.

Two things are especially observable as Mr Bucket proceeds to a
conclusion. First, that he seems imperceptibly to establish a dreadful
right of property in mademoiselle. Secondly, that the very atmosphere
she breathes seems to narrow and contract about her as if a close net
or a pall were being drawn nearer and yet nearer around her
breathless figure.

‘There is no doubt that her ladyship was on the spot at the eventful
period,’ says Mr Bucket, ‘and my foreign friend here saw her, I believe,
from the upper part of the staircase. Her ladyship and George and my
foreign friend were all pretty close on one another's heels. But that
don't signify any more, so I'll not go into it. I found the wadding of the
pistol with which the deceased Mr Tulkinghorn was shot. It was a bit
of the printed description of your house at Chesney Wold. Not much
in that, you'll say, Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet. No. But when my
foreign friend here is so thoroughly off her guard as to think it a safe
time to tear up the rest of that leaf, and when Mrs Bucket puts the
pieces together and finds the wadding wanting, it begins to look like
Queer Street.’

‘These are very long lies,’ mademoiselle interposes. ‘You prose great
deal. Is it that you have almost all finished, or are you speaking
always?’ ‘Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet,’ proceeds Mr Bucket, who
delights in a full title and does violence to himself when he dispenses
with any fragment of it, ‘the last point in the case which I am now
going to mention shows the necessity of patience in our business, and
never doing a thing in a hurry. I watched this young woman yesterday
without her knowledge when she was looking at the funeral, in
company with my wife, who planned to take her there; and I had so
much to convict her, and I saw such an expression in her face, and
my mind so rose against her malice towards her ladyship, and the
time was altogether such a time for bringing down what you may call
retribution upon her, that if I had been a younger hand with less
experience, I should have taken her, certain. Equally, last night, when
her ladyship, as is so universally admired I am sure, come home
looking--why, Lord, a man might almost say like Venus rising from the
ocean--it was so unpleasant and inconsistent to think of her being
charged with a murder of which she was innocent that I felt quite to
want to put an end to the job. What should I have lost? Sir Leicester
Dedlock, Baronet, I should have lost the weapon. My prisoner here
proposed to Mrs Bucket, after the departure of the funeral, that they
should go per bus a little ways into the country and take tea at a very
decent house of entertainment. Now, near that house of entertainment
there's a piece of water. At tea, my prisoner got up to fetch her pocket
handkercher from the bedroom where the bonnets was; she was
rather a long time gone and came back a little out of wind. As soon as
they came home this was reported to me by Mrs Bucket, along with
her observations and suspicions. I had the piece of water dragged by
moonlight, in presence of a couple of our men, and the pocket pistol
was brought up before it had been there half-a-dozen hours. Now, my
dear, put your arm a little further through mine, and hold it steady,
and I shan't hurt you!’

In a trice Mr Bucket snaps a handcuff on her wrist. ‘That's one,’ says
Mr Bucket. ‘Now the other, darling. Two, and all told!’

He rises; she rises too. ‘Where,’ she asks him, darkening her large
eyes until their drooping lids almost conceal them--and yet they stare,
‘where is your false, your treacherous, and cursed wife?’

‘She's gone forrard to the Police Office,’ returns Mr Bucket. ‘You'll see
her there, my dear.’

T would like to kiss her!’ exclaims Mademoiselle Hortense, panting
tigress-like.

‘You'd bite her, I suspect,’ says Mr Bucket.

T would!’ making her eyes very large. ‘I would love to tear her limb
from limb.’

‘Bless you, darling,’ says Mr Bucket with the greatest composure, ‘I'm
fully prepared to hear that. Your sex have such a surprising animosity
against one another when you do differ. You don't mind me half so
much, do you?’

‘No. Though you are a devil still.’

‘Angel and devil by turns, eh?’ cries Mr Bucket. ‘But I am in my
regular employment, you must consider. Let me put your shawl tidy.
I've been lady's maid to a good many before now. Anything wanting to
the bonnet? There's a cab at the door.’

Mademoiselle Hortense, casting an indignant eye at the glass, shakes
herself perfectly neat in one shake and looks, to do her justice,
uncommonly genteel.

‘Listen then, my angel,’ says she after several sarcastic nods. ‘You are
very spiritual. But can you restore him back to life?’

Mr Bucket answers, ‘Not exactly.’

That is droll. Listen yet one time. You are very spiritual. Can you
make a honourable lady of her?’

‘Don't be so malicious,’ says Mr Bucket.

‘Or a haughty gentleman of HIM?’ cries mademoiselle, referring to Sir
Leicester with ineffable disdain. ‘Eh! Oh, then regard him! The poor
infant! Ha! Ha! Ha!’

‘Come, come, why this is worse PARLAYING than the other,’ says Mr
Bucket. ‘Come along!’

‘You cannot do these things? Then you can do as you please with me.
It is but the death, it is all the same. Let us go, my angel. Adieu, you
old man, grey. I pity you, and I despise you!’

With these last words she snaps her teeth together as if her mouth
closed with a spring. It is impossible to describe how Mr Bucket gets
her out, but he accomplishes that feat in a manner so peculiar to
himself, enfolding and pervading her like a cloud, and hovering away
with her as if he were a homely Jupiter and she the object of his
affections.

Sir Leicester, left alone, remains in the same attitude, as though he
were still listening and his attention were still occupied. At length he
gazes round the empty room, and finding it deserted, rises unsteadily
to his feet, pushes back his chair, and walks a few steps, supporting
himself by the table. Then he stops, and with more of those
inarticulate sounds, lifts up his eyes and seems to stare at something.

Heaven knows what he sees. The green, green woods of Chesney Wold,
the noble house, the pictures of his forefathers, strangers defacing
them, officers of police coarsely handling his most precious heirlooms,
thousands of fingers pointing at him, thousands of faces sneering at
him. But if such shadows flit before him to his bewilderment, there is
one other shadow which he can name with something like
distinctness even yet and to which alone he addresses his tearing of
his white hair and his extended arms.

It is she in association with whom, saving that she has been for years
a main fibre of the root of his dignity and pride, he has never had a
selfish thought. It is she whom he has loved, admired, honoured, and
set up for the world to respect. It is she who, at the core of all the
constrained formalities and conventionalities of his life, has been a
stock of living tenderness and love, susceptible as nothing else is of
being struck with the agony he feels. He sees her, almost to the
exclusion of himself, and cannot bear to look upon her cast down from
the high place she has graced so well.

And even to the point of his sinking on the ground, oblivious of his
suffering, he can yet pronounce her name with something like
distinctness in the midst of those intrusive sounds, and in a tone of
mourning and compassion rather than reproach.
CHAPTER LV - Flight

Inspector Bucket of the Detective has not yet struck his great blow, as
just now chronicled, but is yet refreshing himself with sleep
preparatory to his field-day, when through the night and along the
freezing wintry roads a chaise and pair comes out of Lincolnshire,
making its way towards London.

Railroads shall soon traverse all this country, and with a rattle and a
glare the engine and train shall shoot like a meteor over the wide
night-landscape, turning the moon paler; but as yet such things are
non-existent in these parts, though not wholly unexpected.
Preparations are afoot, measurements are made, ground is staked out.
Bridges are begun, and their not yet united piers desolately look at
one another over roads and streams like brick and mortar couples
with an obstacle to their union; fragments of embankments are
thrown up and left as precipices with torrents of rusty carts and
barrows tumbling over them; tripods of tall poles appear on hilltops,
where there are rumours of tunnels; everything looks chaotic and
abandoned in full hopelessness. Along the freezing roads, and through
the night, the post-chaise makes its way without a railroad on its
mind.

Mrs Rouncewell, so many years housekeeper at Chesney Wold, sits
within the chaise; and by her side sits Mrs Bagnet with her grey cloak
and umbrella. The old girl would prefer the bar in front, as being
exposed to the weather and a primitive sort of perch more in
accordance with her usual course of travelling, but Mrs Rouncewell is
too thoughtful of her comfort to admit of her proposing it. The old lady
cannot make enough of the old girl. She sits, in her stately manner,
holding her hand, and regardless of its roughness, puts it often to her
lips. ‘You are a mother, my dear soul,’ says she many times, ‘and you
found out my George's mother!’

‘Why, George,’ returns Mrs Bagnet, ‘was always free with me, ma'am,
and when he said at our house to my Woolwich that of all the things
my Woolwich could have to think of when he grew to be a man, the
comfortablest would be that he had never brought a sorrowful line
into his mother's face or turned a hair of her head grey, then I felt
sure, from his way, that something fresh had brought his own mother
into his mind. I had often known him say to me, in past times, that he
had behaved bad to her.’

‘Never, my dear!’ returns Mrs Rouncewell, bursting into tears. ‘My
blessing on him, never! He was always fond of me, and loving to me,
was my George! But he had a bold spirit, and he ran a little wild and
went for a soldier. And I know he waited at first, in letting us know
about himself, till he should rise to be an officer; and when he didn't
rise, I know he considered himself beneath us, and wouldn't be a
disgrace to us. For he had a lion heart, had my George, always from a
baby!’

The old lady's hands stray about her as of yore, while she recalls, all
in a tremble, what a likely lad, what a fine lad, what a gay good-
humoured clever lad he was; how they all took to him down at
Chesney Wold; how Sir Leicester took to him when he was a young
gentleman; how the dogs took to him; how even the people who had
been angry with him forgave him the moment he was gone, poor boy.
And now to see him after all, and in a prison too! And the broad
stomacher heaves, and the quaint upright old-fashioned figure bends
under its load of affectionate distress.

Mrs Bagnet, with the instinctive skill of a good warm heart, leaves the
old housekeeper to her emotions for a little while--not without passing
the back of her hand across her own motherly eyes-- and presently
chirps up in her cheery manner, ‘So I says to George when I goes to
call him in to tea (he pretended to be smoking his pipe outside), 'What
ails you this afternoon, George, for gracious sake? I have seen all
sorts, and I have seen you pretty often in season and out of season,
abroad and at home, and I never see you so melancholy penitent.'
'Why, Mrs Bagnet,' says George, ‘it's because I AM melancholy and
penitent both, this afternoon, that you see me so.' 'What have you
done, old fellow?' I says. 'Why, Mrs Bagnet,' says George, shaking his
head, ‘what I have done has been done this many a long year, and is
best not tried to be undone now. If I ever get to heaven it won't be for
being a good son to a widowed mother; I say no more.' Now, ma'am,
when George says to me that it's best not tried to be undone now, I
have my thoughts as I have often had before, and I draw it out of
George how he comes to have such things on him that afternoon.
Then George tells me that he has seen by chance, at the lawyer's
office, a fine old lady that has brought his mother plain before him,
and he runs on about that old lady till he quite forgets himself and
paints her picture to me as she used to be, years upon years back. So
I says to George when he has done, who is this old lady he has seen?
And George tells me it's Mrs Rouncewell, housekeeper for more than
half a century to the Dedlock family down at Chesney Wold in
Lincolnshire. George has frequently told me before that he's a
Lincolnshire man, and I says to my old Lignum that night, 'Lignum,
that's his mother for five and for-ty pound!"

All this Mrs Bagnet now relates for the twentieth time at least within
the last four hours. Trilling it out like a kind of bird, with a pretty high
note, that it may be audible to the old lady above the hum of the
wheels.
‘Bless you, and thank you,’ says Mrs Rouncewell. ‘Bless you, and
thank you, my worthy soul!’

‘Dear heart!’ cries Mrs Bagnet in the most natural manner. ‘No thanks
to me, Iam sure. Thanks to yourself, ma'am, for being so ready to pay
‘em! And mind once more, ma'am, what you had best do on finding
George to be your own son is to make him--for your sake --have every
sort of help to put himself in the right and clear himself of a charge of
which he is as innocent as you or me. It won't do to have truth and
justice on his side; he must have law and lawyers,’ exclaims the old
girl, apparently persuaded that the latter form a_ separate
establishment and have dissolved partnership with truth and justice
for ever and a day.

‘He shall have,’ says Mrs Rouncewell, ‘all the help that can be got for
him in the world, my dear. I will spend all I have, and thankfully, to
procure it. Sir Leicester will do his best, the whole family will do their
best. I--I know something, my dear; and will make my own appeal, as
his mother parted from him all these years, and finding him in a jail
at last.’

The extreme disquietude of the old housekeeper's manner in saying
this, her broken words, and her wringing of her hands make a
powerful impression on Mrs Bagnet and would astonish her but that
she refers them all to her sorrow for her son's condition. And yet Mrs
Bagnet wonders too why Mrs Rouncewell should murmur so
distractedly, ‘My Lady, my Lady, my Lady!’ over and over again.

The frosty night wears away, and the dawn breaks, and the post-
chaise comes rolling on through the early mist like the ghost of a
chaise departed. It has plenty of spectral company in ghosts of trees
and hedges, slowly vanishing and giving place to the realities of day.
London reached, the travellers alight, the old housekeeper in great
tribulation and confusion, Mrs Bagnet quite fresh and collected--as
she would be if her next point, with no new equipage and outfit, were
the Cape of Good Hope, the Island of Ascension, Hong Kong, or any
other military station.

But when they set out for the prison where the trooper is confined, the
old lady has managed to draw about her, with her lavender- coloured
dress, much of the staid calmness which is its usual accompaniment.
A wonderfully grave, precise, and handsome piece of old china she
looks, though her heart beats fast and her stomacher is ruffled more
than even the remembrance of this wayward son has ruffled it these
many years.

Approaching the cell, they find the door opening and a warder in the
act of coming out. The old girl promptly makes a sign of entreaty to
him to say nothing; assenting with a nod, he suffers them to enter as
he shuts the door.

So George, who is writing at his table, supposing himself to be alone,
does not raise his eyes, but remains absorbed. The old housekeeper
looks at him, and those wandering hands of hers are quite enough for
Mrs Bagnet's confirmation, even if she could see the mother and the
son together, knowing what she knows, and doubt their relationship.

Not a rustle of the housekeeper's dress, not a gesture, not a word
betrays her. She stands looking at him as he writes on, all
unconscious, and only her fluttering hands give utterance to her
emotions. But they are very eloquent, very, very eloquent. Mrs Bagnet
understands them. They speak of gratitude, of joy, of grief, of hope; of
inextinguishable affection, cherished with no return since this
stalwart man was a stripling; of a better son loved less, and this son
loved so fondly and so proudly; and they speak in such touching
language that Mrs Bagnet's eyes brim up with tears and they run
glistening down her sun-brown face.

‘George Rouncewell! Oh, my dear child, turn and look at me!’

The trooper starts up, clasps his mother round the neck, and falls
down on his knees before her. Whether in a late repentance, whether
in the first association that comes back upon him, he puts his hands
together as a child does when it says its prayers, and raising them
towards her breast, bows down his head, and cries.

‘My George, my dearest son! Always my favourite, and my favourite
still, where have you been these cruel years and years? Grown such a
man too, grown such a fine strong man. Grown so like what I knew he
must be, if it pleased God he was alive!’

She can ask, and he can answer, nothing connected for a time. All
that time the old girl, turned away, leans one arm against the
whitened wall, leans her honest forehead upon it, wipes her eyes with
her serviceable grey cloak, and quite enjoys herself like the best of old
girls as she is.

‘Mother,’ says the trooper when they are more composed, ‘forgive me
first of all, for 1 know my need of it.’

Forgive him! She does it with all her heart and soul. She always has
done it. She tells him how she has had it written in her will, these
many years, that he was her beloved son George. She has never
believed any ill of him, never. If she had died without this happiness--
and she is an old woman now and can't look to live very long--she
would have blessed him with her last breath, if she had had her
senses, as her beloved son George.

‘Mother, I have been an undutiful trouble to you, and I have my
reward; but of late years I have had a kind of glimmering of a purpose
in me too. When I left home I didn't care much, mother--I am afraid
not a great deal--for leaving; and went away and 'listed, harum-
scarum, making believe to think that I cared for nobody, no not I, and
that nobody cared for me.’

The trooper has dried his eyes and put away his handkerchief, but
there is an extraordinary contrast between his habitual manner of
expressing himself and carrying himself and the softened tone in
which he speaks, interrupted occasionally by a half-stifled sob.

‘So I wrote a line home, mother, as you too well know, to say I had
‘listed under another name, and I went abroad. Abroad, at one time I
thought I would write home next year, when I might be better off; and
when that year was out, I thought I would write home next year, when
I might be better off; and when that year was out again, perhaps I
didn't think much about it. So on, from year to year, through a service
of ten years, till I began to get older, and to ask myself why should I
ever write.’

T don't find any fault, child--but not to ease my mind, George? Not a
word to your loving mother, who was growing older too?’

This almost overturns the trooper afresh, but he sets himself up with
a great, rough, sounding clearance of his throat.

‘Heaven forgive me, mother, but I thought there would be small
consolation then in hearing anything about me. There were you,
respected and esteemed. There was my brother, as I read in chance
North Country papers now and then, rising to be prosperous and
famous. There was I a dragoon, roving, unsettled, not self-made like
him, but self-unmade--all my earlier advantages thrown away, all my
little learning unlearnt, nothing picked up but what unfitted me for
most things that I could think of. What business had I to make myself
known? After letting all that time go by me, what good could come of
it? The worst was past with you, mother. I knew by that time (being a
man) how you had mourned for me, and wept for me, and prayed for
me; and the pain was over, or was softened down, and I was better in
your mind as it was.’

The old lady sorrowfully shakes her head, and taking one of his
powerful hands, lays it lovingly upon her shoulder.
‘No, I don't say that it was so, mother, but that I made it out to be so. I
said just now, what good could come of it? Well, my dear mother,
some good might have come of it to myself--and there was the
meanness of it. You would have sought me out; you would have
purchased my discharge; you would have taken me down to Chesney
Wold; you would have brought me and my brother and my brother's
family together; you would all have considered anxiously how to do
something for me and set me up as a respectable civilian. But how
could any of you feel sure of me when I couldn't so much as feel sure
of myself? How could you help regarding as an incumbrance and a
discredit to you an idle dragooning chap who was an incumbrance
and a discredit to himself, excepting under discipline? How could I
look my brother's children in the face and pretend to set them an
example--I, the vagabond boy who had run away from home and been
the grief and unhappiness of my mother's life? 'No, George.’ Such were
my words, mother, when I passed this in review before me: 'You have
made your bed. Now, lie upon it.'‘

Mrs Rouncewell, drawing up her stately form, shakes her head at the
old girl with a swelling pride upon her, as much as to say, JT told you
so!’ The old girl relieves her feelings and testifies her interest in the
conversation by giving the trooper a great poke between the shoulders
with her umbrella; this action she afterwards repeats, at intervals, in
a species of affectionate lunacy, never failing, after the administration
of each of these remonstrances, to resort to the whitened wall and the
grey cloak again.

‘This was the way I brought myself to think, mother, that my best
amends was to lie upon that bed I had made, and die upon it. And I
should have done it (though I have been to see you more than once
down at Chesney Wold, when you little thought of me) but for my old
comrade's wife here, who I find has been too many for me. But I thank
her for it. I thank you for it, Mrs Bagnet, with all my heart and might.’

To which Mrs Bagnet responds with two pokes.

And now the old lady impresses upon her son George, her own dear
recovered boy, her joy and pride, the light of her eyes, the happy close
of her life, and every fond name she can think of, that he must be
governed by the best advice obtainable by money and influence, that
he must yield up his case to the greatest lawyers that can be got, that
he must act in this serious plight as he shall be advised to act and
must not be self-willed, however right, but must promise to think only
of his poor old mother's anxiety and suffering until he is released, or
he will break her heart.
‘Mother, 'tis little enough to consent to,’ returns the trooper, stopping
her with a kiss; ‘tell me what I shall do, and I'll make a late beginning
and do it. Mrs Bagnet, you'll take care of my mother, I know?’

A very hard poke from the old girl's umbrella.

Tf you'll bring her acquainted with Mr Jarndyce and Miss Summerson,
she will find them of her way of thinking, and they will give her the
best advice and assistance.’

‘And, George,’ says the old lady, ‘we must send with all haste for your
brother. He is a sensible sound man as they tell me--out in the world
beyond Chesney Wold, my dear, though I don't know much of it
myself--and will be of great service.’

‘Mother,’ returns the trooper, ‘is it too soon to ask a favour?’
‘Surely not, my dear.’

‘Then grant me this one great favour. Don't let my brother know.’
‘Not know what, my dear?’

‘Not know of me. In fact, mother, I can't bear it; I can't make up my
mind to it. He has proved himself so different from me and has done
so much to raise himself while I've been soldiering that I haven't brass
enough in my composition to see him in this place and under this
charge. How could a man like him be expected to have any pleasure in
such a discovery? It's impossible. No, keep my secret from him,
mother; do me a greater kindness than I deserve and keep my secret
from my brother, of all men.’

‘But not always, dear George?’

‘Why, mother, perhaps not for good and all--though I may come to ask
that too--but keep it now, I do entreat you. If it's ever broke to him
that his rip of a brother has turned up, I could wish,’ says the trooper,
shaking his head very doubtfully, ‘to break it myself and be governed
as to advancing or retreating by the way in which he seems to take it.’

As he evidently has a rooted feeling on this point, and as the depth of
it is recognized in Mrs Bagnet's face, his mother yields her implicit
assent to what he asks. For this he thanks her kindly.

In all other respects, my dear mother, I'll be as tractable and obedient
as you can wish; on this one alone, I stand out. So now I am ready
even for the lawyers. I have been drawing up,’ he glances at his
writing on the table, ‘an exact account of what I knew of the deceased
and how I came to be involved in this unfortunate affair. It's entered,
plain and regular, like an orderly-book; not a word in it but what's
wanted for the facts. I did intend to read it, straight on end,
whensoever I was called upon to say anything in my defence. I hope I
may be let to do it still; but I have no longer a will of my own in this
case, and whatever is said or done, I give my promise not to have any.’

Matters being brought to this so far satisfactory pass, and time being
on the wane, Mrs Bagnet proposes a departure. Again and again the
old lady hangs upon her son's neck, and again and again the trooper
holds her to his broad chest.

‘Where are you going to take my mother, Mrs Bagnet?’

Tam going to the town house, my dear, the family house. I have some
business there that must be looked to directly,’ Mrs Rouncewell
answers.

‘Will you see my mother safe there in a coach, Mrs Bagnet? But of
course I know you will. Why should I ask it!’

Why indeed, Mrs Bagnet expresses with the umbrella.

‘Take her, my old friend, and take my gratitude along with you. Kisses
to Quebec and Malta, love to my godson, a hearty shake of the hand
to Lignum, and this for yourself, and I wish it was ten thousand
pound in gold, my dear!’ So saying, the trooper puts his lips to the old
girl's tanned forehead, and the door shuts upon him in his cell.

No entreaties on the part of the good old housekeeper will induce Mrs
Bagnet to retain the coach for her own conveyance home. Jumping
out cheerfully at the door of the Dedlock mansion and handing Mrs
Rouncewell up the steps, the old girl shakes hands and trudges off,
arriving soon afterwards in the bosom of the Bagnet family and falling
to washing the greens as if nothing had happened.

My Lady is in that room in which she held her last conference with the
murdered man, and is sitting where she sat that night, and is looking
at the spot where he stood upon the hearth studying her so leisurely,
when a tap comes at the door. Who is it? Mrs Rouncewell. What has
brought Mrs Rouncewell to town so unexpectedly?

‘Trouble, my Lady. Sad trouble. Oh, my Lady, may I beg a word with
you?’

What new occurrence is it that makes this tranquil old woman
tremble so? Far happier than her Lady, as her Lady has often thought,
why does she falter in this manner and look at her with such strange
mistrust?

‘What is the matter? Sit down and take your breath.’

‘Oh, my Lady, my Lady. I have found my son--my youngest, who went
away for a soldier so long ago. And he is in prison.’

‘For debt?’
‘Oh, no, my Lady; I would have paid any debt, and joyful.’
‘For what is he in prison then?’

‘Charged with a murder, my Lady, of which he is as innocent as--as I
am. Accused of the murder of Mr Tulkinghorn.’

What does she mean by this look and this imploring gesture? Why
does she come so close? What is the letter that she holds?

‘Lady Dedlock, my dear Lady, my good Lady, my kind Lady! You must
have a heart to feel for me, you must have a heart to forgive me. I was
in this family before you were born. I am devoted to it. But think of my
dear son wrongfully accused.’

I do not accuse him.’

‘No, my Lady, no. But others do, and he is in prison and in danger.
Oh, Lady Dedlock, if you can say but a word to help to clear him, say
it!’

What delusion can this be? What power does she suppose is in the
person she petitions to avert this unjust suspicion, if it be unjust? Her
Lady's handsome eyes regard her with astonishment, almost with fear.

‘My Lady, I came away last night from Chesney Wold to find my son in
my old age, and the step upon the Ghost's Walk was so constant and
so solemn that I never heard the like in all these years. Night after
night, as it has fallen dark, the sound has echoed through your
rooms, but last night it was awfullest. And as it fell dark last night,
my Lady, I got this letter.’

‘What letter is it?’

‘Hush! Hush!’ The housekeeper looks round and answers in a
frightened whisper, ‘My Lady, I have not breathed a word of it, I don't
believe what's written in it, I know it can't be true, I am sure and
certain that it is not true. But my son is in danger, and you must have
a heart to pity me. If you know of anything that is not known to
others, if you have any suspicion, if you have any clue at all, and any
reason for keeping it in your own breast, oh, my dear Lady, think of
me, and conquer that reason, and let it be known! This is the most I
consider possible. I know you are not a hard lady, but you go your
own way always without help, and you are not familiar with your
friends; and all who admire you--and all do --as a beautiful and
elegant lady, know you to be one far away from themselves who can't
be approached close. My Lady, you may have some proud or angry
reasons for disdaining to utter something that you know; if so, pray,
oh, pray, think of a faithful servant whose whole life has been passed
in this family which she dearly loves, and relent, and help to clear my
son! My Lady, my good Lady,’ the old housekeeper pleads with
genuine simplicity, Iam so humble in my place and you are by nature
so high and distant that you may not think what I feel for my child,
but I feel so much that I have come here to make so bold as to beg
and pray you not to be scornful of us if you can do us any right or
justice at this fearful time!’

Lady Dedlock raises her without one word, until she takes the letter
from her hand.

‘Am I to read this?’

‘When I am gone, my Lady, if you please, and then remembering the
most that I consider possible.’

T know of nothing I can do. I know of nothing I reserve that can affect
your son. I have never accused him.’

‘My Lady, you may pity him the more under a false accusation after
reading the letter.’

The old housekeeper leaves her with the letter in her hand. In truth
she is not a hard lady naturally, and the time has been when the sight
of the venerable figure suing to her with such strong earnestness
would have moved her to great compassion. But so long accustomed
to suppress emotion and keep down reality, so long schooled for her
own purposes in that destructive school which shuts up the natural
feelings of the heart like flies in amber and spreads one uniform and
dreary gloss over the good and bad, the feeling and the unfeeling, the
sensible and the senseless, she had subdued even her wonder until
now.

She opens the letter. Spread out upon the paper is a printed account
of the discovery of the body as it lay face downward on the floor, shot
through the heart; and underneath is written her own name, with the
word ‘murderess’ attached.
It falls out of her hand. How long it may have lain upon the ground
she knows not, but it lies where it fell when a servant stands before
her announcing the young man of the name of Guppy. The words have
probably been repeated several times, for they are ringing in her head
before she begins to understand them.

‘Let him come in!’

He comes in. Holding the letter in her hand, which she has taken from
the floor, she tries to collect her thoughts. In the eyes of Mr Guppy
she is the same Lady Dedlock, holding the same prepared, proud,
chilling state.

‘YYour ladyship may not be at first disposed to excuse this visit from
one who has never been welcome to your ladyship’--which he don't
complain of, for he is bound to confess that there never has been any
particular reason on the face of things why he should be-- ‘but I hope
when I mention my motives to your ladyship you will not find fault
with me,’ says Mr Guppy.

Do so.’

Thank your ladyship. I ought first to explain to your ladyship,’ Mr
Guppy sits on the edge of a chair and puts his hat on the carpet at his
feet, ‘that Miss Summerson, whose image, as I formerly mentioned to
your ladyship, was at one period of my life imprinted on my 'eart until
erased by circumstances over which I had no control, communicated
to me, after I had the pleasure of waiting on your ladyship last, that
she particularly wished me to take no steps whatever in any manner
at all relating to her. And Miss Summerson's wishes being to me a law
(except as connected with circumstances over which I have no
control), I consequently never expected to have the distinguished
honour of waiting on your ladyship again.’

And yet he is here now, Lady Dedlock moodily reminds him.

‘And yet I am here now,’ Mr Guppy admits. ‘My object being to
communicate to your ladyship, under the seal of confidence, why I am
here.’

He cannot do so, she tells him, too plainly or too briefly. ‘Nor can I,’
Mr Guppy returns with a sense of injury upon him, ‘too particularly
request your ladyship to take particular notice that it's no personal
affair of mine that brings me here. I have no interested views of my
own to serve in coming here. If it was not for my promise to Miss
Summerson and my keeping of it sacred--I, in point of fact, shouldn't
have darkened these doors again, but should have seen 'em further
first.’
Mr Guppy considers this a favourable moment for sticking up his hair
with both hands.

‘Your ladyship will remember when I mention it that the last time I
was here I run against a party very eminent in our profession and
whose loss we all deplore. That party certainly did from that time
apply himself to cutting in against me in a way that I will call sharp
practice, and did make it, at every turn and point, extremely difficult
for me to be sure that I hadn't inadvertently led up to something
contrary to Miss Summerson's wishes. Self-praise is no
recommendation, but I may say for myself that I am not so bad a man
of business neither.’

Lady Dedlock looks at him in stern inquiry. Mr Guppy immediately
withdraws his eyes from her face and looks anywhere else.

‘Indeed, it has been made so hard,’ he goes on, ‘to have any idea what
that party was up to in combination with others that until the loss
which we all deplore I was gravelled--an expression which your
ladyship, moving in the higher circles, will be so good as to consider
tantamount to knocked over. Small likewise--a name by which I refer
to another party, a friend of mine that your ladyship is not acquainted
with--got to be so close and double-faced that at times it wasn't easy
to keep one's hands off his 'ead. However, what with the exertion of
my humble abilities, and what with the help of a mutual friend by the
name of Mr Tony Weevle (who is of a high aristocratic turn and has
your ladyship's portrait always hanging up in his room), I have now
reasons for an apprehension as to which I come to put your ladyship
upon your guard. First, will your ladyship allow me to ask you
whether you have had any strange visitors this morning? I don't mean
fashionable visitors, but such visitors, for instance, as Miss Barbary's
old servant, or as a person without the use of his lower extremities,
carried upstairs similarly to a guy?’

Nol’

‘Then I assure your ladyship that such visitors have been here and
have been received here. Because I saw them at the door, and waited
at the corner of the square till they came out, and took half an hour's
turn afterwards to avoid them.’

‘What have I to do with that, or what have you? I do not understand
you. What do you mean?’

‘Your ladyship, I come to put you on your guard. There may be no
occasion for it. Very well. Then I have only done my best to keep my
promise to Miss Summerson. I strongly suspect (from what Small has
dropped, and from what we have corkscrewed out of him) that those
letters I was to have brought to your ladyship were not destroyed
when I supposed they were. That if there was anything to be blown
upon, it IS blown upon. That the visitors I have alluded to have been
here this morning to make money of it. And that the money is made,
or making.’

Mr Guppy picks up his hat and rises.

‘Your ladyship, you know best whether there's anything in what I say
or whether there's nothing. Something or nothing, I have acted up to
Miss Summerson's wishes in letting things alone and in undoing what
I had begun to do, as far as possible; that's sufficient for me. In case I
should be taking a liberty in putting your ladyship on your guard
when there's no necessity for it, you will endeavour, I should hope, to
outlive my presumption, and I shall endeavour to outlive your
disapprobation. I now take my farewell of your ladyship, and assure
you that there's no danger of your ever being waited on by me again.’

She scarcely acknowledges these parting words by any look, but when
he has been gone a little while, she rings her bell.

‘Where is Sir Leicester?’
Mercury reports that he is at present shut up in the library alone.
‘Has Sir Leicester had any visitors this morning?’

Several, on business. Mercury proceeds to a description of them,
which has been anticipated by Mr Guppy. Enough; he may go.

So! All is broken down. Her name is in these many mouths, her
husband knows his wrongs, her shame will be published--may be
spreading while she thinks about it--and in addition to the
thunderbolt so long foreseen by her, so unforeseen by him, she is
denounced by an invisible accuser as the murderess of her enemy.

Her enemy he was, and she has often, often, often wished him dead.
Her enemy he is, even in his grave. This dreadful accusation comes
upon her like a new torment at his lifeless hand. And when she recalls
how she was secretly at his door that night, and how she may be
represented to have sent her favourite girl away so soon before merely
to release herself from observation, she shudders as if the hangman's
hands were at her neck.

She has thrown herself upon the floor and lies with her hair all wildly
scattered and her face buried in the cushions of a couch. She rises
up, hurries to and fro, flings herself down again, and rocks and
moans. The horror that is upon her is unutterable. If she really were
the murderess, it could hardly be, for the moment, more intense.

For as her murderous perspective, before the doing of the deed,
however subtle the precautions for its commission, would have been
closed up by a gigantic dilatation of the hateful figure, preventing her
from seeing any consequences beyond it; and as those consequences
would have rushed in, in an unimagined flood, the moment the figure
was laid low--which always happens when a murder is done; so, now
she sees that when he used to be on the watch before her, and she
used to think, ‘if some mortal stroke would but fall on this old man
and take him from my way!’ it was but wishing that all he held against
her in his hand might be flung to the winds and chance-sown in many
places. So, too, with the wicked relief she has felt in his death. What
was his death but the key- stone of a gloomy arch removed, and now
the arch begins to fall in a thousand fragments, each crushing and
mangling piecemeal!

Thus, a terrible impression steals upon and overshadows her that
from this pursuer, living or dead--obdurate and imperturbable before
her in his well-remembered shape, or not more obdurate and
imperturbable in his coffin-bed--there is no escape but in death.
Hunted, she flies. The complication of her shame, her dread, remorse,
and misery, overwhelms her at its height; and even her strength of
self-reliance is overturned and whirled away like a leaf before a mighty
wind.

She hurriedly addresses these lines to her husband, seals, and leaves
them on her table:

If I am sought for, or accused of, his murder, believe that I am wholly
innocent. Believe no other good of me, for I am innocent of nothing
else that you have heard, or will hear, laid to my charge. He prepared
me, on that fatal night, for his disclosure of my guilt to you. After he
had left me, I went out on pretence of walking in the garden where I
sometimes walk, but really to follow him and make one last petition
that he would not protract the dreadful suspense on which I have
been racked by him, you do not know how long, but would mercifully
strike next morning.

I found his house dark and silent. I rang twice at his door, but there
was no reply, and I came home.

I have no home left. I will encumber you no more. May you, in your
just resentment, be able to forget the unworthy woman on whom you
have wasted a most generous devotion--who avoids you only with a
deeper shame than that with which she hurries from herself--and who
writes this last adieu.
She veils and dresses quickly, leaves all her jewels and her money,
listens, goes downstairs at a moment when the hall is empty, opens
and shuts the great door, flutters away in the shrill frosty wind.
CHAPTER LVI - Pursuit

Impassive, as behoves its high breeding, the Dedlock town house
stares at the other houses in the street of dismal grandeur and gives
no outward sign of anything going wrong within. Carriages rattle,
doors are battered at, the world exchanges calls; ancient charmers
with skeleton throats and peachy cheeks that have a rather ghastly
bloom upon them seen by daylight, when indeed these fascinating
creatures look like Death and the Lady fused together, dazzle the eyes
of men. Forth from the frigid mews come easily swinging carriages
guided by short-legged coachmen in flaxen wigs, deep sunk into
downy hammercloths, and up behind mount luscious Mercuries
bearing sticks of state and wearing cocked hats broadwise, a spectacle
for the angels.

The Dedlock town house changes not externally, and hours pass
before its exalted dullness is disturbed within. But Volumnia the fair,
being subject to the prevalent complaint of boredom and finding that
disorder attacking her spirits with some virulence, ventures at length
to repair to the library for change of scene. Her gentle tapping at the
door producing no response, she opens it and peeps in; seeing no one
there, takes possession.

The sprightly Dedlock is reputed, in that grass-grown city of the
ancients, Bath, to be stimulated by an urgent curiosity which impels
her on all convenient and inconvenient occasions to sidle about with a
golden glass at her eye, peering into objects of every description.
Certain it is that she avails herself of the present opportunity of
hovering over her kinsman's letters and papers like a bird, taking a
short peck at this document and a blink with her head on one side at
that document, and hopping about from table to table with her glass
at her eye in an inquisitive and restless manner. In the course of these
researches she stumbles over something, and turning her glass in
that direction, sees her kinsman lying on the ground like a felled tree.

Volumnia's pet little scream acquires a considerable augmentation of
reality from this surprise, and the house is quickly in commotion.
Servants tear up and down stairs, bells are violently rung, doctors are
sent for, and Lady Dedlock is sought in all directions, but not found.
Nobody has seen or heard her since she last rang her bell. Her letter
to Sir Leicester is discovered on her table, but it is doubtful yet
whether he has not received another missive from another world
requiring to be personally answered, and all the living languages, and
all the dead, are as one to him.

They lay him down upon his bed, and chafe, and rub, and fan, and
put ice to his head, and try every means of restoration. Howbeit, the
day has ebbed away, and it is night in his room before his stertorous
breathing lulls or his fixed eyes show any consciousness of the candle
that is occasionally passed before them. But when this change begins,
it goes on; and by and by he nods or moves his eyes or even his hand
in token that he hears and comprehends.

He fell down, this morning, a handsome stately gentleman, somewhat
infirm, but of a fine presence, and with a well-filled face. He lies upon
his bed, an aged man with sunken cheeks, the decrepit shadow of
himself. His voice was rich and mellow and he had so long been
thoroughly persuaded of the weight and import to mankind of any
word he said that his words really had come to sound as if there were
something in them. But now he can only whisper, and what he
whispers sounds like what it is--mere jumble and jargon.

His favourite and faithful housekeeper stands at his bedside. It is the
first act he notices, and he clearly derives pleasure from it. After vainly
trying to make himself understood in speech, he makes signs for a
pencil. So inexpressively that they cannot at first understand him; it is
his old housekeeper who makes out what he wants and brings in a
slate.

After pausing for some time, he slowly scrawls upon it in a hand that
is not his, ‘Chesney Wold?’

No, she tells him; he is in London. He was taken ill in the library this
morning. Right thankful she is that she happened to come to London
and is able to attend upon him.

Tt is not an illness of any serious consequence, Sir Leicester. You will
be much better to-morrow, Sir Leicester. All the gentlemen say so.’
This, with the tears coursing down her fair old face.

After making a survey of the room and looking with particular
attention all round the bed where the doctors stand, he writes, ‘My
Lady.’

‘My Lady went out, Sir Leicester, before you were taken ill, and don't
know of your illness yet.’

He points again, in great agitation, at the two words. They all try to
quiet him, but he points again with increased agitation. On their
looking at one another, not knowing what to say, he takes the slate
once more and writes ‘My Lady. For God's sake, where?’ And makes
an imploring moan.

It is thought better that his old housekeeper should give him Lady
Dedlock's letter, the contents of which no one knows or can surmise.
She opens it for him and puts it out for his perusal. Having read it
twice by a great effort, he turns it down so that it shall not be seen
and lies moaning. He passes into a kind of relapse or into a swoon,
and it is an hour before he opens his eyes, reclining on his faithful
and attached old servant's arm. The doctors know that he is best with
her, and when not actively engaged about him, stand aloof.

The slate comes into requisition again, but the word he wants to write
he cannot remember. His anxiety, his eagerness, and affliction at this
pass are pitiable to behold. It seems as if he must go mad in the
necessity he feels for haste and the inability under which he labours
of expressing to do what or to fetch whom. He has written the letter B,
and there stopped. Of a sudden, in the height of his misery, he puts
Mr before it. The old housekeeper suggests Bucket. Thank heaven!
That's his meaning.

Mr Bucket is found to be downstairs, by appointment. Shall he come
up?

There is no possibility of misconstruing Sir Leicester's burning wish to
see him or the desire he signifies to have the room cleared of every one
but the housekeeper. It is speedily done, and Mr Bucket appears. Of
all men upon earth, Sir Leicester seems fallen from his high estate to
place his sole trust and reliance upon this man.

‘Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, I'm sorry to see you like this. I hope
you'll cheer up. I'm sure you will, on account of the family credit.’

Sir Leicester puts her letter in his hands and looks intently in his face
while he reads it. A new intelligence comes into Mr Bucket's eye as he
reads on; with one hook of his finger, while that eye is still glancing
over the words, he indicates, ‘Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, I
understand you.’

Sir Leicester writes upon the slate. ‘Full forgiveness. Find--’ Mr Bucket
stops his hand.

‘Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, I'll find her. But my search after her
must be begun out of hand. Not a minute must be lost.’

With the quickness of thought, he follows Sir Leicester Dedlock's look
towards a little box upon a table.

‘Bring it here, Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet? Certainly. Open it with
one of these here keys? Certainly. The littlest key? TO be sure. Take
the notes out? So I will. Count 'em? That's soon done. Twenty and
thirty's fifty, and twenty's seventy, and fifty's one twenty, and forty's
one sixty. Take 'em for expenses? That I'll do, and render an account
of course. Don't spare money? No I won't.’
The velocity and certainty of Mr Bucket's interpretation on all these
heads is little short of miraculous. Mrs Rouncewell, who holds the
light, is giddy with the swiftness of his eyes and hands as he starts
up, furnished for his journey.

‘You're George's mother, old lady; that's about what you are, I believe?’
says Mr Bucket aside, with his hat already on and buttoning his coat.

Yes, sir, I am his distressed mother.’

‘So I thought, according to what he mentioned to me just now. Well,
then, I'll tell you something. You needn't be distressed no more. Your
son's all right. Now, don't you begin a-crying, because what you've got
to do is to take care of Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, and you won't
do that by crying. As to your son, he's all right, I tell you; and he
sends his loving duty, and hoping you're the same. He's discharged
honourable; that's about what HE is; with no more imputation on his
character than there is on yours, and yours is a tidy one, I'LL bet a
pound. You may trust me, for I took your son. He conducted himself
in a game way, too, on that occasion; and he's a fine-made man, and
you're a fine-made old lady, and you're a mother and son, the pair of
you, as might be showed for models in a caravan. Sir Leicester
Dedlock, Baronet, what you've trusted to me I'll go through with. Don't
you be afraid of my turning out of my way, right or left, or taking a
sleep, or a wash, or a shave till I have found what I go in search of.
Say everything as is kind and forgiving on your part? Sir Leicester
Dedlock, Baronet, I will. And I wish you better, and these family
affairs smoothed over--as, Lord, many other family affairs equally has
been, and equally will be, to the end of time.’

With this peroration, Mr Bucket, buttoned up, goes quietly out,
looking steadily before him as if he were already piercing the night in
quest of the fugitive.

His first step is to take himself to Lady Dedlock's rooms and look all
over them for any trifling indication that may help him. The rooms are
in darkness now; and to see Mr Bucket with a wax-light in his hand,
holding it above his head and taking a sharp mental inventory of the
many delicate objects so curiously at variance with himself, would be
to see a sight--which nobody DOES see, as he is particular to lock
himself in.

‘A spicy boudoir, this,’ says Mr Bucket, who feels in a manner
furbished up in his French by the blow of the morning. ‘Must have
cost a sight of money. Rum articles to cut away from, these; she must
have been hard put to it!’
Opening and shutting table-drawers and looking into caskets and
jewel-cases, he sees the reflection of himself in various mirrors, and
moralizes thereon.

‘One might suppose I was a-moving in the fashionable circles and
getting myself up for almac's,’ says Mr Bucket. T begin to think I must
be a swell in the Guards without knowing it.’

Ever looking about, he has opened a dainty little chest in an inner
drawer. His great hand, turning over some gloves which it can
scarcely feel, they are so light and soft within it, comes upon a white
handkerchief.

‘Hum! Let's have a look at YOU,’ says Mr Bucket, putting down the
light. ‘What should YOU be kept by yourself for? What's YOUR motive?
Are you her ladyship's property, or somebody else's? You've got a
mark upon you somewheres or another, I suppose?’

He finds it as he speaks, ‘Esther Summerson.’

‘Oh!’ says Mr Bucket, pausing, with his finger at his ear. ‘Come, I'll
take YOU.’

He completes his observations as quietly and carefully as he has
carried them on, leaves everything else precisely as he found it, glides
away after some five minutes in all, and passes into the street. With a
glance upward at the dimly lighted windows of Sir Leicester's room, he
sets off, full-swing, to the nearest coach- stand, picks out the horse
for his money, and directs to be driven to the shooting gallery. Mr
Bucket does not claim to be a scientific judge of horses, but he lays
out a little money on the principal events in that line, and generally
sums up his knowledge of the subject in the remark that when he
sees a horse as can go, he knows him.

His knowledge is not at fault in the present instance. Clattering over
the stones at a dangerous pace, yet thoughtfully bringing his keen
eyes to bear on every slinking creature whom he passes in the
midnight streets, and even on the lights in upper windows where
people are going or gone to bed, and on all the turnings that he rattles
by, and alike on the heavy sky, and on the earth where the snow lies
thin--for something may present itself to assist him, anywhere--he
dashes to his destination at such a speed that when he stops the
horse half smothers him in a cloud of steam.

‘Unbear him half a moment to freshen him up, and I'll be back.’

He runs up the long wooden entry and finds the trooper smoking his
pipe.
T thought I should, George, after what you have gone through, my lad.
I haven't a word to spare. Now, honour! All to save a woman. Miss
Summerson that was here when Gridley died--that was the name, I
know--all right--where does she live?’

The trooper has just come from there and gives him the address, near
Oxford Street.

‘You won't repent it, George. Good night!’

He is off again, with an impression of having seen Phil sitting by the
frosty fire staring at him open-mouthed, and gallops away again, and
gets out in a cloud of steam again.

Mr Jarndyce, the only person up in the house, is just going to bed,
rises from his book on hearing the rapid ringing at the bell, and comes
down to the door in his dressing-gown.

‘Don't be alarmed, sir.’ In a moment his visitor is confidential with him
in the hall, has shut the door, and stands with his hand upon the
lock. ‘I've had the pleasure of seeing you before. Inspector Bucket.
Look at that handkerchief, sir, Miss Esther Summerson's. Found it
myself put away in a drawer of Lady Dedlock's, quarter of an hour
ago. Not a moment to lose. Matter of life or death. You know Lady
Dedlock?’

Yes.’

‘There has been a discovery there to-day. Family affairs have come
out. Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, has had a fit--apoplexy or
paralysis--and couldn't be brought to, and precious time has been
lost. Lady Dedlock disappeared this afternoon and left a letter for him
that looks bad. Run your eye over it. Here it is!’

Mr Jarndyce, having read it, asks him what he thinks.

T don't know. It looks like suicide. Anyways, there's more and more
danger, every minute, of its drawing to that. I'd give a hundred pound
an hour to have got the start of the present time. Now, Mr Jarndyce, I
am employed by Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, to follow her and find
her, to save her and take her his forgiveness. I have money and full
power, but I want something else. I want Miss Summerson.’

Mr Jarndyce in a troubled voice repeats, ‘Miss Summerson?’
‘Now, Mr Jarndyce’--Mr Bucket has read his face with the greatest

attention all along--’I speak to you as a gentleman of a humane heart,
and under such pressing circumstances as don't often happen. If ever
delay was dangerous, it's dangerous now; and if ever you couldn't
afterwards forgive yourself for causing it, this is the time. Eight or ten
hours, worth, as I tell you, a hundred pound apiece at least, have
been lost since Lady Dedlock disappeared. I am charged to find her. I
am Inspector Bucket. Besides all the rest that's heavy on her, she has
upon her, as she believes, suspicion of murder. If I follow her alone,
she, being in ignorance of what Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, has
communicated to me, may be driven to desperation. But if I follow her
in company with a young lady, answering to the description of a
young lady that she has a tenderness for--I ask no question, and I say
no more than that--she will give me credit for being friendly. Let me
come up with her and be able to have the hold upon her of putting
that young lady for'ard, and I'll save her and prevail with her if she is
alive. Let me come up with her alone--a hard matter--and I'll do my
best, but I don't answer for what the best may be. Time flies; it's
getting on for one o'clock. When one strikes, there's another hour
gone, and it's worth a thousand pound now instead of a hundred.’

This is all true, and the pressing nature of the case cannot be
questioned. Mr Jarndyce begs him to remain there while he speaks to
Miss Summerson. Mr Bucket says he will, but acting on his usual
principle, does no such thing, following upstairs instead and keeping
his man in sight. So he remains, dodging and lurking about in the
gloom of the staircase while they confer. In a very little time Mr
Jarndyce comes down and tells him that Miss Summerson will join
him directly and place herself under his protection to accompany him
where he pleases. Mr Bucket, satisfied, expresses high approval and
awaits her coming at the door.

There he mounts a high tower in his mind and looks out far and wide.
Many solitary figures he perceives creeping through the streets; many
solitary figures out on heaths, and roads, and lying under haystacks.
But the figure that he seeks is not among them. Other solitaries he
perceives, in nooks of bridges, looking over; and in shadowed places
down by the river's level; and a dark, dark, shapeless object drifting
with the tide, more solitary than all, clings with a drowning hold on
his attention.

Where is she? Living or dead, where is she? If, as he folds the
handkerchief and carefully puts it up, it were able with an enchanted
power to bring before him the place where she found it and the night-
landscape near the cottage where it covered the little child, would he
descry her there? On the waste where the brick-kilns are burning with
a pale blue flare, where the straw- roofs of the wretched huts in which
the bricks are made are being scattered by the wind, where the clay
and water are hard frozen and the mill in which the gaunt blind horse
goes round all day looks like an instrument of human torture--
traversing this deserted, blighted spot there is a lonely figure with the
sad world to itself, pelted by the snow and driven by the wind, and
cast out, it would seem, from all companionship. It is the figure of a
woman, too; but it is miserably dressed, and no such clothes ever
came through the hall and out at the great door of the Dedlock
mansion.
CHAPTER LVII - Esther's Narrative

I had gone to bed and fallen asleep when my guardian knocked at the
door of my room and begged me to get up directly. On my hurrying to
speak to him and learn what had happened, he told me, after a word
or two of preparation, that there had been a discovery at Sir Leicester
Dedlock's. That my mother had fled, that a person was now at our
door who was empowered to convey to her the fullest assurances of
affectionate protection and forgiveness if he could possibly find her,
and that I was sought for to accompany him in the hope that my
entreaties might prevail upon her if his failed. Something to this
general purpose I made out, but I was thrown into such a tumult of
alarm, and hurry and distress, that in spite of every effort I could
make to subdue my agitation, I did not seem, to myself, fully to
recover my right mind until hours had passed.

But I dressed and wrapped up expeditiously without waking Charley
or any one and went down to Mr Bucket, who was the person
entrusted with the secret. In taking me to him my guardian told me
this, and also explained how it was that he had come to think of me.
Mr Bucket, in a low voice, by the light of my guardian's candle, read to
me in the hall a letter that my mother had left upon her table; and I
suppose within ten minutes of my having been aroused I was sitting
beside him, rolling swiftly through the streets.

His manner was very keen, and yet considerate when he explained to
me that a great deal might depend on my being able to answer,
without confusion, a few questions that he wished to ask me. These
were, chiefly, whether I had had much communication with my
mother (to whom he only referred as Lady Dedlock), when and where I
had spoken with her last, and how she had become possessed of my
handkerchief. When I had satisfied him on these points, he asked me
particularly to consider--taking time to think--whether within my
knowledge there was any one, no matter where, in whom she might be
at all likely to confide under circumstances of the last necessity. I
could think of no one but my guardian. But by and by I mentioned Mr
Boythorn. He came into my mind as connected with his old chivalrous
manner of mentioning my mother's name and with what my guardian
had informed me of his engagement to her sister and his unconscious
connexion with her unhappy story.

My companion had stopped the driver while we held this conversation,
that we might the better hear each other. He now told him to go on
again and said to me, after considering within himself for a few
moments, that he had made up his mind how to proceed. He was
quite willing to tell me what his plan was, but I did not feel clear
enough to understand it.
We had not driven very far from our lodgings when we stopped in a
by-street at a public-looking place lighted up with gas. Mr Bucket took
me in and sat me in an arm-chair by a bright fire. It was now past
one, as I saw by the clock against the wall. Two police officers, looking
in their perfectly neat uniform not at all like people who were up all
night, were quietly writing at a desk; and the place seemed very quiet
altogether, except for some beating and calling out at distant doors
underground, to which nobody paid any attention.

A third man in uniform, whom Mr Bucket called and to whom he
whispered his instructions, went out; and then the two others advised
together while one wrote from Mr Bucket's subdued dictation. It was a
description of my mother that they were busy with, for Mr Bucket
brought it to me when it was done and read it in a whisper. It was
very accurate indeed.

The second officer, who had attended to it closely, then copied it out
and called in another man in uniform (there were several in an outer
room), who took it up and went away with it. All this was done with
the greatest dispatch and without the waste of a moment; yet nobody
was at all hurried. As soon as the paper was sent out upon its travels,
the two officers resumed their former quiet work of writing with
neatness and care. Mr Bucket thoughtfully came and warmed the
soles of his boots, first one and then the other, at the fire.

‘Are you well wrapped up, Miss Summerson?’ he asked me as his eyes
met mine. ‘It's a desperate sharp night for a young lady to be out in.’

I told him I cared for no weather and was warmly clothed.

It may be a long job,’ he observed; ‘but so that it ends well, never
mind, miss.’

T pray to heaven it may end well!’ said I.

He nodded comfortingly. ‘You see, whatever you do, don't you go and
fret yourself. You keep yourself cool and equal for anything that may
happen, and it'll be the better for you, the better for me, the better for
Lady Dedlock, and the better for Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet.’

He was really very kind and gentle, and as he stood before the fire
warming his boots and rubbing his face with his forefinger, I felt a
confidence in his sagacity which reassured me. It was not yet a
quarter to two when I heard horses' feet and wheels outside. ‘Now,
Miss Summerson,’ said he, ‘we are off, if you please!’

He gave me his arm, and the two officers courteously bowed me out,
and we found at the door a phaeton or barouche with a postilion and
post horses. Mr Bucket handed me in and took his own seat on the
box. The man in uniform whom he had sent to fetch this equipage
then handed him up a dark lantern at his request, and when he had
given a few directions to the driver, we rattled away.

I was far from sure that I was not in a dream. We rattled with great
rapidity through such a labyrinth of streets that I soon lost all idea
where we were, except that we had crossed and re-crossed the river,
and still seemed to be traversing a low-lying, waterside, dense
neighbourhood of narrow thoroughfares chequered by docks and
basins, high piles of warehouses, swing-bridges, and masts of ships.
At length we stopped at the corner of a little slimy turning, which the
wind from the river, rushing up it, did not purify; and I saw my
companion, by the light of his lantern, in conference with several men
who looked like a mixture of police and sailors. Against the
mouldering wall by which they stood, there was a bill, on which I
could discern the words, ‘Found Drowned’; and this and an
inscription about drags possessed me with the awful suspicion
shadowed forth in our visit to that place.

I had no need to remind myself that I was not there by the indulgence
of any feeling of mine to increase the difficulties of the search, or to
lessen its hopes, or enhance its delays. I remained quiet, but what I
suffered in that dreadful spot I never can forget. And still it was like
the horror of a dream. A man yet dark and muddy, in long swollen
sodden boots and a hat like them, was called out of a boat and
whispered with Mr Bucket, who went away with him down some
slippery steps--as if to look at something secret that he had to show.
They came back, wiping their hands upon their coats, after turning
over something wet; but thank God it was not what I feared!

After some further conference, Mr Bucket (whom everybody seemed to
know and defer to) went in with the others at a door and left me in the
carriage, while the driver walked up and down by his horses to warm
himself. The tide was coming in, as I judged from the sound it made,
and I could hear it break at the end of the alley with a little rush
towards me. It never did so--and I thought it did so, hundreds of
times, in what can have been at the most a quarter of an hour, and
probably was less--but the thought shuddered through me that it
would cast my mother at the horses' feet.

Mr Bucket came out again, exhorting the others to be vigilant,
darkened his lantern, and once more took his seat. ‘Don't you be
alarmed, Miss Summerson, on account of our coming down here,’ he
said, turning to me. T only want to have everything in train and to
know that it is in train by looking after it myself. Get on, my lad!’
We appeared to retrace the way we had come. Not that I had taken
note of any particular objects in my perturbed state of mind, but
judging from the general character of the streets. We called at another
office or station for a minute and crossed the river again. During the
whole of this time, and during the whole search, my companion,
wrapped up on the box, never relaxed in his vigilance a single
moment; but when we crossed the bridge he seemed, if possible, to be
more on the alert than before. He stood up to look over the parapet, he
alighted and went back after a shadowy female figure that flitted past
us, and he gazed into the profound black pit of water with a face that
made my heart die within me. The river had a fearful look, so overcast
and secret, creeping away so fast between the low flat lines of shore--
so heavy with indistinct and awful shapes, both of substance and
shadow; so death-like and mysterious. I have seen it many times since
then, by sunlight and by moonlight, but never free from the
impressions of that journey. In my memory the lights upon the bridge
are always burning dim, the cutting wind is eddying round the
homeless woman whom we pass, the monotonous wheels are whirling
on, and the light of the carriage- lamps reflected back looks palely in
upon me--a face rising out of the dreaded water.

Clattering and clattering through the empty streets, we came at length
from the pavement on to dark smooth roads and began to leave the
houses behind us. After a while I recognized the familiar way to Saint
Albans. At Barnet fresh horses were ready for us, and we changed and
went on. It was very cold indeed, and the open country was white with
snow, though none was falling then.

‘An old acquaintance of yours, this road, Miss Summerson,’ said Mr
Bucket cheerfully.

‘Yes,’ I returned. ‘Have you gathered any intelligence?’

‘None that can be quite depended on as yet,’ he answered, ‘but it's
early times as yet.’

He had gone into every late or early public-house where there was a
light (they were not a few at that time, the road being then much
frequented by drovers) and had got down to talk to the turnpike-
keepers. I had heard him ordering drink, and chinking money, and
making himself agreeable and merry everywhere; but whenever he
took his seat upon the box again, his face resumed its watchful steady
look, and he always said to the driver in the same business tone, ‘Get
on, my lad!’

With all these stoppages, it was between five and six o'clock and we
were yet a few miles short of Saint Albans when he came out of one of
these houses and handed me in a cup of tea.
‘Drink it, Miss Summerson, it'll do you good. You're beginning to get
more yourself now, ain't you?’

I thanked him and said I hoped so.

‘You was what you may call stunned at first,’ he returned; ‘and Lord,
no wonder! Don't speak loud, my dear. It's all right. She's on ahead.’

I don't know what joyful exclamation I made or was going to make,
but he put up his finger and I stopped myself.

‘Passed through here on foot this evening about eight or nine. I heard
of her first at the archway toll, over at Highgate, but couldn't make
quite sure. Traced her all along, on and off. Picked her up at one
place, and dropped her at another; but she's before us now, safe. Take
hold of this cup and saucer, ostler. Now, if you wasn't brought up to
the butter trade, look out and see if you can catch half a crown in
your t'other hand. One, two, three, and there you are! Now, my lad,
try a gallop!’

We were soon in Saint Albans and alighted a little before day, when I
was just beginning to arrange and comprehend the occurrences of the
night and really to believe that they were not a dream. Leaving the
carriage at the posting-house and ordering fresh horses to be ready,
my companion gave me his arm, and we went towards home.

‘As this is your regular abode, Miss Summerson, you see,’ he
observed, ‘I should like to know whether you've been asked for by any
stranger answering the description, or whether Mr Jarndyce has. I
don't much expect it, but it might be.’

As we ascended the hill, he looked about him with a sharp eye--the
day was now breaking--and reminded me that I had come down it one
night, as I had reason for remembering, with my little servant and
poor Jo, whom he called Toughey.

I wondered how he knew that.

‘When you passed a man upon the road, just yonder, you know,’ said
Mr Bucket.

Yes, I remembered that too, very well.
‘That was me,’ said Mr Bucket.
Seeing my surprise, he went on, T drove down in a gig that afternoon

to look after that boy. You might have heard my wheels when you
came out to look after him yourself, for I was aware of you and your
little maid going up when I was walking the horse down. Making an
inquiry or two about him in the town, I soon heard what company he
was in and was coming among the brick-fields to look for him when I
observed you bringing him home here.’

‘Had he committed any crime?’ I asked.

‘None was charged against him,’ said Mr Bucket, coolly lifting off his
hat, ‘but I suppose he wasn't over-particular. No. What I wanted him
for was in connexion with keeping this very matter of Lady Dedlock
quiet. He had been making his tongue more free than welcome as toa
small accidental service he had been paid for by the deceased Mr
Tulkinghorn; and it wouldn't do, at any sort of price, to have him
playing those games. So having warned him out of London, I made an
afternoon of it to warn him to keep out of it now he WAS away, and go
farther from it, and maintain a bright look-out that I didn't catch him
coming back again.’

Poor creature!’ said I.

‘Poor enough,’ assented Mr Bucket, ‘and trouble enough, and well
enough away from London, or anywhere else. I was regularly turned
on my back when I found him taken up by your establishment, I do
assure you.’

I asked him why. ‘Why, my dear?’ said Mr Bucket. ‘Naturally there
was no end to his tongue then. He might as well have been born with
a yard and a half of it, and a remnant over.’

Although I remember this conversation now, my head was in
confusion at the time, and my power of attention hardly did more than
enable me to understand that he entered into these particulars to
divert me. With the same kind intention, manifestly, he often spoke to
me of indifferent things, while his face was busy with the one object
that we had in view. He still pursued this subject as we turned in at
the garden-gate.

‘Ah!’ said Mr Bucket. ‘Here we are, and a nice retired place it is. Puts a
man in mind of the country house in the Woodpecker- tapping, that
was known by the smoke which so gracefully curled. They're early
with the kitchen fire, and that denotes good servants. But what you've
always got to be careful of with servants is who comes to see 'em; you
never know what they're up to if you don't know that. And another
thing, my dear. Whenever you find a young man behind the kitchen-
door, you give that young man in charge on suspicion of being
secreted in a dwelling-house with an unlawful purpose.’
We were now in front of the house; he looked attentively and closely at
the gravel for footprints before he raised his eyes to the windows.

‘Do you generally put that elderly young gentleman in the same room
when he's on a visit here, Miss Summerson?’ he inquired, glancing at
Mr Skimpole's usual chamber.

‘You know Mr Skimpole!’ said I.

‘What do you call him again?’ returned Mr Bucket, bending down his
ear. ‘Skimpole, is it? I've often wondered what his name might be.
Skimpole. Not John, I should say, nor yet Jacob?’

‘Harold,’ I told him.

‘Harold. Yes. He's a queer bird is Harold,’ said Mr Bucket, eyeing me
with great expression.

‘He is a singular character,’ said I.
‘No idea of money,’ observed Mr Bucket. ‘He takes it, though!’

I involuntarily returned for answer that I perceived Mr Bucket knew
him.

‘Why, now I'll tell you, Miss Summerson,’ he replied. ‘Your mind will
be all the better for not running on one point too continually, and I'll
tell you for a change. It was him as pointed out to me where Toughey
was. I made up my mind that night to come to the door and ask for
Toughey, if that was all; but willing to try a move or so first, if any
such was on the board, I just pitched up a morsel of gravel at that
window where I saw a shadow. As soon as Harold opens it and I have
had a look at him, thinks I, you're the man for me. So I smoothed him
down a bit about not wanting to disturb the family after they was gone
to bed and about its being a thing to be regretted that charitable
young ladies should harbour vagrants; and then, when I pretty well
understood his ways, I said I should consider a fypunnote well
bestowed if I could relieve the premises of Toughey without causing
any noise or trouble. Then says he, lifting up his eyebrows in the
gayest way, 'It's no use mentioning a fypunnote to me, my friend,
because I'm a mere child in such matters and have no idea of money.’
Of course I understood what his taking it so easy meant; and being
now quite sure he was the man for me, I wrapped the note round a
little stone and threw it up to him. Well! He laughs and beams, and
looks as innocent as you like, and says, 'But I don't know the value of
these things. What am I to DO with this?' 'Spend it, sir,’ says I. 'But I
shall be taken in,' he says, 'they won't give me the right change, I shall
lose it, it's no use to me.’ Lord, you never saw such a face as he
carried it with! Of course he told me where to find Toughey, and I
found him.’

I regarded this as very treacherous on the part of Mr Skimpole
towards my guardian and as passing the usual bounds of his childish
innocence.

‘Bounds, my dear?’ returned Mr Bucket. ‘Bounds? Now, Miss
Summerson, I'll give you a piece of advice that your husband will find
useful when you are happily married and have got a family about you.
Whenever a person says to you that they are as innocent as can be in
all concerning money, look well after your own money, for they are
dead certain to collar it if they can. Whenever a person proclaims to
you 'In worldly matters I'm a child,’ you consider that that person is
only a-crying off from being held accountable and that you have got
that person's number, and it's Number One. Now, I am not a poetical
man myself, except in a vocal way when it goes round a company, but
I'm a practical one, and that's my experience. So's this rule. Fast and
loose in one thing, fast and loose in everything. I never knew it fail. No
more will you. Nor no one. With which caution to the unwary, my
dear, I take the liberty of pulling this here bell, and so go back to our
business.’

I believe it had not been for a moment out of his mind, any more than
it had been out of my mind, or out of his face. The whole household
were amazed to see me, without any notice, at that time in the
morning, and so accompanied; and their surprise was not diminished
by my inquiries. No one, however, had been there. It could not be
doubted that this was the truth.

Then, Miss Summerson,’ said my companion, ‘we can't be too soon at
the cottage where those brickmakers are to be found. Most inquiries
there I leave to you, if you'll be so good as to make 'em. The naturalest
way is the best way, and the naturalest way is your own way.’

We set off again immediately. On arriving at the cottage, we found it
shut up and apparently deserted, but one of the neighbours who knew
me and who came out when I was trying to make some one hear
informed me that the two women and their husbands now lived
together in another house, made of loose rough bricks, which stood on
the margin of the piece of ground where the kilns were and where the
long rows of bricks were drying. We lost no time in repairing to this
place, which was within a few hundred yards; and as the door stood
ajar, I pushed it open.

There were only three of them sitting at breakfast, the child lying
asleep on a bed in the corner. It was Jenny, the mother of the dead
child, who was absent. The other woman rose on seeing me; and the
men, though they were, as usual, sulky and silent, each gave me a
morose nod of recognition. A look passed between them when Mr
Bucket followed me in, and I was surprised to see that the woman
evidently knew him.

I had asked leave to enter of course. Liz (the only name by which I
knew her) rose to give me her own chair, but I sat down on a stool
near the fire, and Mr Bucket took a corner of the bedstead. Now that I
had to speak and was among people with whom I was not familiar, I
became conscious of being hurried and giddy. It was very difficult to
begin, and I could not help bursting into tears.

‘Liz,’ said I, ‘I have come a long way in the night and through the snow
to inquire after a lady--’

‘Who has been here, you know,’ Mr Bucket struck in, addressing the
whole group with a composed propitiatory face; ‘that's the lady the
young lady means. The lady that was here last night, you know.’

‘And who told YOU as there was anybody here?’ inquired Jenny's
husband, who had made a surly stop in his eating to listen and now
measured him with his eye.

‘A person of the name of Michael Jackson, with a blue welveteen
waistcoat with a double row of mother of pearl buttons,’ Mr Bucket
immediately answered.

‘He had as good mind his own business, whoever he is,’ growled the
man.

‘He's out of employment, I believe,’ said Mr Bucket apologetically for
Michael Jackson, ‘and so gets talking.’

The woman had not resumed her chair, but stood faltering with her
hand upon its broken back, looking at me. I thought she would have
spoken to me privately if she had dared. She was still in this attitude
of uncertainty when her husband, who was eating with a lump of
bread and fat in one hand and his clasp-knife in the other, struck the
handle of his knife violently on the table and told her with an oath to
mind HER own business at any rate and sit down.

T should like to have seen Jenny very much,’ said I, ‘for I am sure she
would have told me all she could about this lady, whom I am very
anxious indeed--you cannot think how anxious--to overtake. Will
Jenny be here soon? Where is she?’

The woman had a great desire to answer, but the man, with another
oath, openly kicked at her foot with his heavy boot. He left it to
Jenny's husband to say what he chose, and after a dogged silence the
latter turned his shaggy head towards me.

Tm not partial to gentlefolks coming into my place, as you've heerd
me say afore now, I think, miss. I let their places be, and it's curious
they can't let my place be. There'd be a pretty shine made if I was to
go a-wisitin THEM, I think. Howsoever, I don't so much complain of
you as of some others, and I'm agreeable to make you a civil answer,
though I give notice that I'm not a-going to be drawed like a badger.
Will Jenny be here soon? No she won't. Where is she? She's gone up
to Lunnun.’ ‘Did she go last night?’ I asked.

‘Did she go last night? Ah! She went last night,’ he answered with a
sulky jerk of his head.

‘But was she here when the lady came? And what did the lady say to
her? And where is the lady gone? I beg and pray you to be so kind as
to tell me,’ said I, for I am in great distress to know.’

Tf my master would let me speak, and not say a word of harm--’ the
woman timidly began.

‘Your master,’ said her husband, muttering an imprecation with slow
emphasis, ‘will break your neck if you meddle with wot don't concern

?

you.

After another silence, the husband of the absent woman, turning to
me again, answered me with his usual grumbling unwillingness.

‘Wos Jenny here when the lady come? Yes, she wos here when the
lady come. Wot did the lady say to her? Well, I'll tell you wot the lady
said to her. She said, "You remember me as come one time to talk to
you about the young lady as had been a-wisiting of you? You
remember me as give you somethink handsome for a handkercher wot
she had left?' Ah, she remembered. So we all did. Well, then, wos that
young lady up at the house now? No, she warn't up at the house now.
Well, then, lookee here. The lady was upon a journey all alone, strange
as we might think it, and could she rest herself where you're a setten
for a hour or so. Yes she could, and so she did. Then she went--it
might be at twenty minutes past eleven, and it might be at twenty
minutes past twelve; we ain't got no watches here to know the time by,
nor yet clocks. Where did she go? I don't know where she go'd. She
went one way, and Jenny went another; one went right to Lunnun,
and t'other went right from it. That's all about it. Ask this man. He
heerd it all, and see it all. He knows.’

The other man repeated, ‘That's all about it.’
‘Was the lady crying?’ I inquired.

‘Devil a bit,’ returned the first man. ‘Her shoes was the worse, and her
clothes was the worse, but she warn't--not as I see.’

The woman sat with her arms crossed and her eyes upon the ground.
Her husband had turned his seat a little so as to face her and kept his
hammer-like hand upon the table as if it were in readiness to execute
his threat if she disobeyed him.

T hope you will not object to my asking your wife,’ said I, ‘how the lady
looked.’

‘Come, then!’ he gruffly cried to her. ‘You hear what she says. Cut it
short and tell her.’

‘Bad,’ replied the woman. ‘Pale and exhausted. Very bad.’
‘Did she speak much?’

‘Not much, but her voice was hoarse.’

She answered, looking all the while at her husband for leave.
‘Was she faint?’ said I. ‘Did she eat or drink here?’

‘Go on!’ said the husband in answer to her look. Tell her and cut it
short.’

‘She had a little water, miss, and Jenny fetched her some bread and
tea. But she hardly touched it.’

‘And when she went from here,’ I was proceeding, when Jenny's
husband impatiently took me up.

‘When she went from here, she went right away nor'ard by the high
road. Ask on the road if you doubt me, and see if it warn't so. Now,
there's the end. That's all about it.’

I glanced at my companion, and finding that he had already risen and
was ready to depart, thanked them for what they had told me, and
took my leave. The woman looked full at Mr Bucket as he went out,
and he looked full at her.

‘Now, Miss Summerson,’ he said to me as we walked quickly away.
‘They've got her ladyship's watch among 'em. That's a positive fact.’

You saw it?’ I exclaimed.
Just as good as saw it,’ he returned. ‘Else why should he talk about
his 'twenty minutes past’ and about his having no watch to tell the
time by? Twenty minutes! He don't usually cut his time so fine as
that. If he comes to half-hours, it's as much as HE does. Now, you
see, either her ladyship gave him that watch or he took it. I think she
gave it him. Now, what should she give it him for? What should she
give it him for?’

He repeated this question to himself several times as we hurried on,
appearing to balance between a variety of answers that arose in his
mind.

‘Tf time could be spared,’ said Mr Bucket, ‘which is the only thing that
can't be spared in this case, I might get it out of that woman; but it's
too doubtful a chance to trust to under present circumstances. They
are up to keeping a close eye upon her, and any fool knows that a
poor creetur like her, beaten and kicked and scarred and bruised from
head to foot, will stand by the husband that ill uses her through thick
and thin. There's something kept back. It's a pity but what we had
seen the other woman.’

I regretted it exceedingly, for she was very grateful, and I felt sure
would have resisted no entreaty of mine.

It's possible, Miss Summerson,’ said Mr Bucket, pondering on it, ‘that
her ladyship sent her up to London with some word for you, and it's
possible that her husband got the watch to let her go. It don't come
out altogether so plain as to please me, but it's on the cards. Now, I
don't take kindly to laying out the money of Sir Leicester Dedlock,
Baronet, on these roughs, and I don't see my way to the usefulness of
it at present. No! So far our road, Miss Summerson, is for'ard--straight
ahead--and keeping everything quiet!’

We called at home once more that I might send a hasty note to my
guardian, and then we hurried back to where we had left the carriage.
The horses were brought out as soon as we were seen coming, and we
were on the road again in a few minutes.

It had set in snowing at daybreak, and it now snowed hard. The air
was so thick with the darkness of the day and the density of the fall
that we could see but a very little way in any direction. Although it
was extremely cold, the snow was but partially frozen, and it churned-
-with a sound as if it were a beach of small shells --under the hoofs of
the horses into mire and water. They sometimes slipped and
floundered for a mile together, and we were obliged to come to a
standstill to rest them. One horse fell three times in this first stage,
and trembled so and was so shaken that the driver had to dismount
from his saddle and lead him at last.
I could eat nothing and could not sleep, and I grew so nervous under
those delays and the slow pace at which we travelled that I had an
unreasonable desire upon me to get out and walk. Yielding to my
companion's better sense, however, I remained where I was. All this
time, kept fresh by a certain enjoyment of the work in which he was
engaged, he was up and down at every house we came to, addressing
people whom he had never beheld before as old acquaintances,
running in to warm himself at every fire he saw, talking and drinking
and shaking hands at every bar and tap, friendly with every waggoner,
wheelwright, blacksmith, and toll- taker, yet never seeming to lose
time, and always mounting to the box again with his watchful, steady
face and his business-like ‘Get on, my lad!’

When we were changing horses the next time, he came from the
stable-yard, with the wet snow encrusted upon him and dropping off
him--plashing and crashing through it to his wet knees as he had
been doing frequently since we left Saint Albans--and spoke to me at
the carriage side.

‘Keep up your spirits. It's certainly true that she came on here, Miss
Summerson. There's not a doubt of the dress by this time, and the
dress has been seen here.’

‘Still on foot?’ said I.

‘Still on foot. I think the gentleman you mentioned must be the point
she's aiming at, and yet I don't like his living down in her own part of
the country neither.’

T know so little,’ said I. There may be some one else nearer here, of
whom I never heard.’

‘That's true. But whatever you do, don't you fall a-crying, my dear;
and don't you worry yourself no more than you can help. Get on, my
lad!’

The sleet fell all that day unceasingly, a thick mist came on early, and
it never rose or lightened for a moment. Such roads I had never seen. I
sometimes feared we had missed the way and got into the ploughed
grounds or the marshes. If I ever thought of the time I had been out, it
presented itself as an indefinite period of great duration, and |
seemed, in a strange way, never to have been free from the anxiety
under which I then laboured.

As we advanced, I began to feel misgivings that my companion lost
confidence. He was the same as before with all the roadside people,
but he looked graver when he sat by himself on the box. I saw his
finger uneasily going across and across his mouth during the whole of
one long weary stage. I overheard that he began to ask the drivers of
coaches and other vehicles coming towards us what passengers they
had seen in other coaches and vehicles that were in advance. Their
replies did not encourage him. He always gave me a reassuring beck
of his finger and lift of his eyelid as he got upon the box again, but he
seemed perplexed now when he said, ‘Get on, my lad!’

At last, when we were changing, he told me that he had lost the track
of the dress so long that he began to be surprised. It was nothing, he
said, to lose such a track for one while, and to take it up for another
while, and so on; but it had disappeared here in an unaccountable
manner, and we had not come upon it since. This corroborated the
apprehensions I had formed, when he began to look at direction-posts,
and to leave the carriage at cross roads for a quarter of an hour ata
time while he explored them. But I was not to be down-hearted, he
told me, for it was as likely as not that the next stage might set us
right again.

The next stage, however, ended as that one ended; we had no new
clue. There was a spacious inn here, solitary, but a comfortable
substantial building, and as we drove in under a large gateway before
I knew it, where a landlady and her pretty daughters came to the
carriage-door, entreating me to alight and refresh myself while the
horses were making ready, I thought it would be uncharitable to
refuse. They took me upstairs to a warm room and left me there.

It was at the corner of the house, I remember, looking two ways. On
one side to a stable-yard open to a by-road, where the ostlers were
unharnessing the splashed and tired horses from the muddy carriage,
and beyond that to the by-road itself, across which the sign was
heavily swinging; on the other side to a wood of dark pine-trees. Their
branches were encumbered with snow, and it silently dropped off in
wet heaps while I stood at the window. Night was setting in, and its
bleakness was enhanced by the contrast of the pictured fire glowing
and gleaming in the window- pane. As I looked among the stems of the
trees and followed the discoloured marks in the snow where the thaw
was sinking into it and undermining it, I thought of the motherly face
brightly set off by daughters that had just now welcomed me and of
MY mother lying down in such a wood to die.

I was frightened when I found them all about me, but I remembered
that before I fainted I tried very hard not to do it; and that was some
little comfort. They cushioned me up on a large sofa by the fire, and
then the comely landlady told me that I must travel no further to-
night, but must go to bed. But this put me into such a tremble lest
they should detain me there that she soon recalled her words and
compromised for a rest of half an hour.
A good endearing creature she was. She and her three fair girls, all so
busy about me. I was to take hot soup and broiled fowl, while Mr
Bucket dried himself and dined elsewhere; but I could not do it when
a snug round table was presently spread by the fireside, though I was
very unwilling to disappoint them. However, I could take some toast
and some hot negus, and as I really enjoyed that refreshment, it made
some recompense.

Punctual to the time, at the half-hour's end the carriage came
rumbling under the gateway, and they took me down, warmed,
refreshed, comforted by kindness, and safe (I assured them) not to
faint any more. After I had got in and had taken a grateful leave of
them all, the youngest daughter--a blooming girl of nineteen, who was
to be the first married, they had told me--got upon the carriage step,
reached in, and kissed me. I have never seen her, from that hour, but
I think of her to this hour as my friend.

The transparent windows with the fire and light, looking so bright and
warm from the cold darkness out of doors, were soon gone, and again
we were crushing and churning the loose snow. We went on with toil
enough, but the dismal roads were not much worse than they had
been, and the stage was only nine miles. My companion smoking on
the box--I had thought at the last inn of begging him to do so when I
saw him standing at a great fire in a comfortable cloud of tobacco--
was as vigilant as ever and as quickly down and up again when we
came to any human abode or any human creature. He had lighted his
little dark lantern, which seemed to be a favourite with him, for we
had lamps to the carriage; and every now and then he turned it upon
me to see that I was doing well. There was a folding-window to the
carriage-head, but I never closed it, for it seemed like shutting out
hope.

We came to the end of the stage, and still the lost trace was not
recovered. I looked at him anxiously when we stopped to change, but I
knew by his yet graver face as he stood watching the ostlers that he
had heard nothing. Almost in an instant afterwards, as I leaned back
in my seat, he looked in, with his lighted lantern in his hand, an
excited and quite different man.

‘What is it?’ said I, starting. Is she here?’
‘No, no. Don't deceive yourself, my dear. Nobody's here. But I've got it!’
The crystallized snow was in his eyelashes, in his hair, lying in ridges

on his dress. He had to shake it from his face and get his breath
before he spoke to me.
‘Now, Miss Summerson,’ said he, beating his finger on the apron,
‘don't you be disappointed at what I'm a-going to do. You know me.
I'm Inspector Bucket, and you can trust me. We've come a long way;
never mind. Four horses out there for the next stage up! Quick!’

There was a commotion in the yard, and a man came running out of
the stables to know if he meant up or down.

Up, I tell you! Up! Ain't it English? Up!’
‘Up?’ said I, astonished. ‘To London! Are we going back?’

‘Miss Summerson,’ he answered, ‘back. Straight back as a die. You
know me. Don't be afraid. I'll follow the other, by G--’

‘The other?’ I repeated. ‘Who?’

‘You called her Jenny, didn't you? I'll follow her. Bring those two pair
out here for a crown a man. Wake up, some of you!’

‘You will not desert this lady we are in search of; you will not abandon
her on such a night and in such a state of mind as I know her to be
in!’ said I, in an agony, and grasping his hand.

‘You are right, my dear, I won't. But I'll follow the other. Look alive
here with them horses. Send a man for'ard in the saddle to the next
stage, and let him send another for'ard again, and order four on, up,
right through. My darling, don't you be afraid!’

These orders and the way in which he ran about the yard urging them
caused a general excitement that was scarcely less bewildering to me
than the sudden change. But in the height of the confusion, a
mounted man galloped away to order the relays, and our horses were
put to with great speed.

‘My dear,’ said Mr Bucket, jumping to his seat and looking in again, ‘“--
you'll excuse me if I'm too familiar--don't you fret and worry yourself
no more than you can help. I say nothing else at present; but you
know me, my dear; now, don't you?’

I endeavoured to say that I knew he was far more capable than I of
deciding what we ought to do, but was he sure that this was right?
Could I not go forward by myself in search of--I grasped his hand
again in my distress and whispered it to him--of my own mother.

‘My dear,’ he answered, IT know, I know, and would I put you wrong,
do you think? Inspector Bucket. Now you know me, don't you?’
What could I say but yes!

‘Then you keep up as good a heart as you can, and you rely upon me
for standing by you, no less than by Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet.
Now, are you right there?’

‘All right, sir!’

‘Off she goes, then. And get on, my lads!’

We were again upon the melancholy road by which we had come,

tearing up the miry sleet and thawing snow as if they were torn up by
a waterwheel.
CHAPTER LVIII - A Wintry Day and Night

Still impassive, as behoves its breeding, the Dedlock town house
carries itself as usual towards the street of dismal grandeur. There are
powdered heads from time to time in the little windows of the hall,
looking out at the untaxed powder falling all day from the sky; and in
the same conservatory there is peach blossom turning itself exotically
to the great hall fire from the nipping weather out of doors. It is given
out that my Lady has gone down into Lincolnshire, but is expected to
return presently.

Rumour, busy overmuch, however, will not go down into Lincolnshire.
It persists in flitting and chattering about town. It knows that that
poor unfortunate man, Sir Leicester, has been sadly used. It hears,
my dear child, all sorts of shocking things. It makes the world of five
miles round quite merry. Not to know that there is something wrong
at the Dedlocks' is to augur yourself unknown. One of the peachy-
cheeked charmers with the skeleton throats is already apprised of all
the principal circumstances that will come out before the Lords on Sir
Leicester's application for a bill of divorce.

At Blaze and Sparkle's the jewellers and at Sheen and Gloss's the
mercers, it is and will be for several hours the topic of the age, the
feature of the century. The patronesses of those establishments, albeit
so loftily inscrutable, being as nicely weighed and measured there as
any other article of the stock-in-trade, are perfectly understood in this
new fashion by the rawest hand behind the counter. ‘Our people, Mr
Jones,’ said Blaze and Sparkle to the hand in question on engaging
him, ‘our people, sir, are sheep--mere sheep. Where two or three
marked ones go, all the rest follow. Keep those two or three in your
eye, Mr Jones, and you have the flock.’ So, likewise, Sheen and Gloss
to THEIR Jones, in reference to knowing where to have the
fashionable people and how to bring what they (Sheen and Gloss)
choose into fashion. On similar unerring principles, Mr Sladdery the
librarian, and indeed the great farmer of gorgeous sheep, admits this
very day, ‘Why yes, sir, there certainly ARE reports concerning Lady
Dedlock, very current indeed among my high connexion, sir. You see,
my high connexion must talk about something, sir; and it's only to get
a subject into vogue with one or two ladies I could name to make it go
down with the whole. Just what I should have done with those ladies,
sir, in the case of any novelty you had left to me to bring in, they have
done of themselves in this case through knowing Lady Dedlock and
being perhaps a little innocently jealous of her too, sir. You'll find, sir,
that this topic will be very popular among my high connexion. If it had
been a speculation, sir, it would have brought money. And when I say
so, you may trust to my being right, sir, for I have made it my
business to study my high connexion and to be able to wind it up like
a clock, sir.’
Thus rumour thrives in the capital, and will not go down into
Lincolnshire. By half-past five, post meridian, Horse Guards' time, it
has even elicited a new remark from the Honourable Mr Stables,
which bids fair to outshine the old one, on which he has so long
rested his colloquial reputation. This sparkling sally is to the effect
that although he always knew she was the best-groomed woman in
the stud, he had no idea she was a bolter. It is immensely received in
turf-circles.

At feasts and festivals also, in firmaments she has often graced, and
among constellations she outshone but yesterday, she is still the
prevalent subject. What is itP Who is it? When was it? Where was it?
How was it? She is discussed by her dear friends with all the
genteelest slang in vogue, with the last new word, the last new
manner, the last new drawl, and the perfection of polite indifference. A
remarkable feature of the theme is that it is found to be so inspiring
that several people come out upon it who never came out before--
positively say things! William Buffy carries one of these smartnesses
from the place where he dines down to the House, where the Whip for
his party hands it about with his snuff-box to keep men together who
want to be off, with such effect that the Speaker (who has had it
privately insinuated into his own ear under the corner of his wig)
cries, ‘Order at the bar!’ three times without making an impression.

And not the least amazing circumstance connected with her being
vaguely the town talk is that people hovering on the confines of Mr
Sladdery's high connexion, people who know nothing and ever did
know nothing about her, think it essential to their reputation to
pretend that she is their topic too, and to retail her at second- hand
with the last new word and the last new manner, and the last new
drawl, and the last new polite indifference, and all the rest of it, all at
second-hand but considered equal to new in inferior systems and to
fainter stars. If there be any man of letters, art, or science among
these little dealers, how noble in him to support the feeble sisters on
such majestic crutches!

So goes the wintry day outside the Dedlock mansion. How within it?

Sir Leicester, lying in his bed, can speak a little, though with difficulty
and indistinctness. He is enjoined to silence and to rest, and they
have given him some opiate to lull his pain, for his old enemy is very
hard with him. He is never asleep, though sometimes he seems to fall
into a dull waking doze. He caused his bedstead to be moved out
nearer to the window when he heard it was such inclement weather,
and his head to be so adjusted that he could see the driving snow and
sleet. He watches it as it falls, throughout the whole wintry day.
Upon the least noise in the house, which is kept hushed, his hand is
at the pencil. The old housekeeper, sitting by him, knows what he
would write and whispers, ‘No, he has not come back yet, Sir
Leicester. It was late last night when he went. He has been but a little
time gone yet.’

He withdraws his hand and falls to looking at the sleet and snow
again until they seem, by being long looked at, to fall so thick and fast
that he is obliged to close his eyes for a minute on the giddy whirl of
white flakes and icy blots.

He began to look at them as soon as it was light. The day is not yet far
spent when he conceives it to be necessary that her rooms should be
prepared for her. It is very cold and wet. Let there be good fires. Let
them know that she is expected. Please see to it yourself. He writes to
this purpose on his slate, and Mrs Rouncewell with a heavy heart
obeys.

‘For I dread, George,’ the old lady says to her son, who waits below to
keep her company when she has a little leisure, I dread, my dear, that
my Lady will never more set foot within these walls.’

‘That's a bad presentiment, mother.’

‘Nor yet within the walls of Chesney Wold, my dear.’

‘That's worse. But why, mother?’

‘When I saw my Lady yesterday, George, she looked to me--and I may
say at me too--as if the step on the Ghost's Walk had almost walked
her down.’

‘Come, come! You alarm yourself with old-story fears, mother.’

‘No I don't, my dear. No I don't. It's going on for sixty year that I have
been in this family, and I never had any fears for it before. But it's
breaking up, my dear; the great old Dedlock family is breaking up.’

T hope not, mother.’

T am thankful I have lived long enough to be with Sir Leicester in this
illness and trouble, for I know I am not too old nor too useless to be a
welcomer sight to him than anybody else in my place would be. But
the step on the Ghost's Walk will walk my Lady down, George; it has

been many a day behind her, and now it will pass her and go on.’

‘Well, mother dear, I say again, I hope not.’
‘Ah, so do I, George,’ the old lady returns, shaking her head and
parting her folded hands. ‘But if my fears come true, and he has to
know it, who will tell him!’

‘Are these her rooms?’
‘These are my Lady's rooms, just as she left them.’

‘Why, now,’ says the trooper, glancing round him and speaking in a
lower voice, I begin to understand how you come to think as you do
think, mother. Rooms get an awful look about them when they are
fitted up, like these, for one person you are used to see in them, and
that person is away under any shadow, let alone being God knows
where.’

He is not far out. As all partings foreshadow the great final one, so,
empty rooms, bereft of a familiar presence, mournfully whisper what
your room and what mine must one day be. My Lady's state has a
hollow look, thus gloomy and abandoned; and in the inner apartment,
where Mr Bucket last night made his secret perquisition, the traces of
her dresses and her ornaments, even the mirrors accustomed to
reflect them when they were a portion of herself, have a desolate and
vacant air. Dark and cold as the wintry day is, it is darker and colder
in these deserted chambers than in many a hut that will barely
exclude the weather; and though the servants heap fires in the grates
and set the couches and the chairs within the warm glass screens
that let their ruddy light shoot through to the furthest corners, there
is a heavy cloud upon the rooms which no light will dispel.

The old housekeeper and her son remain until the preparations are
complete, and then she returns upstairs. Volumnia has taken Mrs
Rouncewell's place in the meantime, though pearl necklaces and
rouge pots, however calculated to embellish Bath, are but indifferent
comforts to the invalid under present circumstances. Volumnia, not
being supposed to know (and indeed not knowing) what is the matter,
has found it a ticklish task to offer appropriate observations and
consequently has supplied their place with distracting smoothings of
the bed-linen, elaborate locomotion on tiptoe, vigilant peeping at her
kinsman's eyes, and one exasperating whisper to herself of, ‘He is
asleep.’ In disproof of which superfluous remark Sir Leicester has
indignantly written on the slate, I am not.’

Yielding, therefore, the chair at the bedside to the quaint old
housekeeper, Volumnia_ sits at a table a _ little removed,
sympathetically sighing. Sir Leicester watches the sleet and snow and
listens for the returning steps that he expects. In the ears of his old
servant, looking as if she had stepped out of an old picture-frame to
attend a summoned Dedlock to another world, the silence is fraught
with echoes of her own words, ‘Who will tell him!’

He has been under his valet's hands this morning to be made
presentable and is as well got up as the circumstances will allow. He
is propped with pillows, his grey hair is brushed in its usual manner,
his linen is arranged to a nicety, and he is wrapped in a responsible
dressing-gown. His eye-glass and his watch are ready to his hand. It is
necessary--less to his own dignity now perhaps than for her sake--
that he should be seen as little disturbed and as much himself as may
be. Women will talk, and Volumnia, though a Dedlock, is no
exceptional case. He keeps her here, there is little doubt, to prevent
her talking somewhere else. He is very ill, but he makes his present
stand against distress of mind and body most courageously.

The fair Volumnia, being one of those sprightly girls who cannot long
continue silent without imminent peril of seizure by the dragon
Boredom, soon indicates the approach of that monster with a series of
undisguisable yawns. Finding it impossible to suppress those yawns
by any other process than conversation, she compliments Mrs
Rouncewell on her son, declaring that he positively is one of the finest
figures she ever saw and as soldierly a looking person, she should
think, as what's his name, her favourite Life Guardsman --the man
she dotes on, the dearest of creatures--who was killed at Waterloo.

Sir Leicester hears this tribute with so much surprise and stares
about him in such a confused way that Mrs Rouncewell feels it
necessary to explain.

‘Miss Dedlock don't speak of my eldest son, Sir Leicester, but my
youngest. I have found him. He has come home.’

Sir Leicester breaks silence with a harsh cry. ‘George? Your son
George come home, Mrs Rouncewell?’

The old housekeeper wipes her eyes. ‘Thank God. Yes, Sir Leicester.’

Does this discovery of some one lost, this return of some one so long
gone, come upon him as a strong confirmation of his hopes? Does he
think, ‘Shall I not, with the aid I have, recall her safely after this, there
being fewer hours in her case than there are years in his?’

It is of no use entreating him; he is determined to speak now, and he
does. In a thick crowd of sounds, but still intelligibly enough to be

understood.

‘Why did you not tell me, Mrs Rouncewell?’
It happened only yesterday, Sir Leicester, and I doubted your being
well enough to be talked to of such things.’

Besides, the giddy Volumnia now remembers with her little scream
that nobody was to have known of his being Mrs Rouncewell's son and
that she was not to have told. But Mrs Rouncewell protests, with
warmth enough to swell the stomacher, that of course she would have
told Sir Leicester as soon as he got better.

‘Where is your son George, Mrs Rouncewell?’ asks Sir Leicester,

Mrs Rouncewell, not a little alarmed by his disregard of the doctor's
injunctions, replies, in London.

‘Where in London?’
Mrs Rouncewell is constrained to admit that he is in the house.
‘Bring him here to my room. Bring him directly.’

The old lady can do nothing but go in search of him. Sir Leicester,
with such power of movement as he has, arranges himself a little to
receive him. When he has done so, he looks out again at the falling
sleet and snow and listens again for the returning steps. A quantity of
straw has been tumbled down in the street to deaden the noises there,
and she might be driven to the door perhaps without his hearing
wheels.

He is lying thus, apparently forgetful of his newer and minor surprise,
when the housekeeper returns, accompanied by her trooper son. Mr
George approaches softly to the bedside, makes his bow, squares his
chest, and stands, with his face flushed, very heartily ashamed of
himself.

‘Good heaven, and it is really George Rouncewell!’ exclaims Sir
Leicester. ‘Do you remember me, George?’

The trooper needs to look at him and to separate this sound from that
sound before he knows what he has said, but doing this and being a
little helped by his mother, he replies, ‘I must have a very bad
memory, indeed, Sir Leicester, if I failed to remember you.’

‘When I look at you, George Rouncewell,’ Sir Leicester observes with
difficulty, I see something of a boy at Chesney Wold--I remember well-
-very well.’

He looks at the trooper until tears come into his eyes, and then he
looks at the sleet and snow again.
T ask your pardon, Sir Leicester,’ says the trooper, ‘but would you
accept of my arms to raise you up? You would lie easier, Sir Leicester,
if you would allow me to move you.’

Tf you please, George Rouncewell; if you will be so good.’

The trooper takes him in his arms like a child, lightly raises him, and
turns him with his face more towards the window. ‘Thank you. You
have your mother's gentleness,’ returns Sir Leicester, ‘and your own
strength. Thank you.’

He signs to him with his hand not to go away. George quietly remains
at the bedside, waiting to be spoken to.

‘Why did you wish for secrecy?’ It takes Sir Leicester some time to ask
this.

‘Truly Iam not much to boast of, Sir Leicester, and I--I should still, Sir
Leicester, if you was not so indisposed--which I hope you will not be
long--I should still hope for the favour of being allowed to remain
unknown in general. That involves explanations not very hard to be
guessed at, not very well timed here, and not very creditable to myself.
However opinions may differ on a variety of subjects, I should think it
would be universally agreed, Sir Leicester, that I am not much to
boast of.’

‘You have been a soldier,’ observes Sir Leicester, ‘and a faithful one.’

George makes his military bow. ‘As far as that goes, Sir Leicester, I
have done my duty under discipline, and it was the least I could do.’

‘You find me,’ says Sir Leicester, whose eyes are much attracted
towards him, ‘far from well, George Rouncewell.’

T am very sorry both to hear it and to see it, Sir Leicester.’

T am sure you are. No. In addition to my older malady, I have had a
sudden and bad attack. Something that deadens,’ making an
endeavour to pass one hand down one side, ‘and confuses,’ touching
his lips.

George, with a look of assent and sympathy, makes another bow. The
different times when they were both young men (the trooper much the
younger of the two) and looked at one another down at Chesney Wold
arise before them both and soften both.

Sir Leicester, evidently with a great determination to say, in his own
manner, something that is on his mind before relapsing into silence,
tries to raise himself among his pillows a little more. George,
observant of the action, takes him in his arms again and places him
as he desires to be. ‘Thank you, George. You are another self to me.
You have often carried my spare gun at Chesney Wold, George. You
are familiar to me in these strange circumstances, very familiar.’ He
has put Sir Leicester's sounder arm over his shoulder in lifting him
up, and Sir Leicester is slow in drawing it away again as he says these
words.

IT was about to add,’ he presently goes on, I was about to add,
respecting this attack, that it was unfortunately simultaneous with a
slight misunderstanding between my Lady and myself. I do not mean
that there was any difference between us (for there has been none),
but that there was a misunderstanding of certain circumstances
important only to ourselves, which deprives me, for a little while, of
my Lady's society. She has found it necessary to make a journey--I
trust will shortly return. Volumnia, do I make myself intelligible? The
words are not quite under my command in the manner of
pronouncing them.’

Volumnia understands him perfectly, and in truth he delivers himself
with far greater plainness than could have been supposed possible a
minute ago. The effort by which he does so is written in the anxious
and labouring expression of his face. Nothing but the strength of his
purpose enables him to make it.

‘Therefore, Volumnia, I desire to say in your presence--and in the
presence of my old retainer and friend, Mrs Rouncewell, whose truth
and fidelity no one can question, and in the presence of her son
George, who comes back like a familiar recollection of my youth in the
home of my ancestors at Chesney Wold--in case I should relapse, in
case I should not recover, in case I should lose both my speech and
the power of writing, though I hope for better things--’

The old housekeeper weeping silently; Volumnia in the greatest
agitation, with the freshest bloom on her cheeks; the trooper with his
arms folded and his head a little bent, respectfully attentive.

‘Therefore I desire to say, and to call you all to witness-- beginning,
Volumnia, with yourself, most solemnly--that I am on unaltered terms
with Lady Dedlock. That I assert no cause whatever of complaint
against her. That I have ever had the strongest affection for her, and
that I retain it undiminished. Say this to herself, and to every one. If
you ever say less than this, you will be guilty of deliberate falsehood to
me.’

Volumnia tremblingly protests that she will observe his injunctions to
the letter.
‘My Lady is too high in position, too handsome, too accomplished, too
superior in most respects to the best of those by whom she is
surrounded, not to have her enemies and traducers, I dare say. Let it
be known to them, as I make it known to you, that being of sound
mind, memory, and understanding, I revoke no disposition I have
made in her favour. I abridge nothing I have ever bestowed upon her. I
am on unaltered terms with her, and I recall--having the full power to
do it if I were so disposed, as you see--no act I have done for her
advantage and happiness.’

His formal array of words might have at any other time, as it has often
had, something ludicrous in it, but at this time it is serious and
affecting. His noble earnestness, his fidelity, his gallant shielding of
her, his generous conquest of his own wrong and his own pride for her
sake, are simply honourable, manly, and true. Nothing less worthy
can be seen through the lustre of such qualities in the commonest
mechanic, nothing less worthy can be seen in the _ best-born
gentleman. In such a light both aspire alike, both rise alike, both
children of the dust shine equally.

Overpowered by his exertions, he lays his head back on his pillows
and closes his eyes for not more than a minute, when he again
resumes his watching of the weather and his attention to the muffled
sounds. In the rendering of those little services, and in the manner of
their acceptance, the trooper has become installed as necessary to
him. Nothing has been said, but it is quite understood. He falls a step
or two backward to be out of sight and mounts guard a little behind
his mother's chair.

The day is now beginning to decline. The mist and the sleet into which
the snow has all resolved itself are darker, and the blaze begins to tell
more vividly upon the room walls and furniture. The gloom augments;
the bright gas springs up in the streets; and the pertinacious oil
lamps which yet hold their ground there, with their source of life half
frozen and half thawed, twinkle gaspingly like fiery fish out of water--
as they are. The world, which has been rumbling over the straw and
pulling at the bell, ‘to inquire,’ begins to go home, begins to dress, to
dine, to discuss its dear friend with all the last new modes, as already
mentioned.

Now does Sir Leicester become worse, restless, uneasy, and in great
pain. Volumnia, lighting a candle (with a predestined aptitude for
doing something objectionable), is bidden to put it out again, for it is
not yet dark enough. Yet it is very dark too, as dark as it will be all
night. By and by she tries again. No! Put it out. It is not dark enough
yet.
His old housekeeper is the first to understand that he is striving to
uphold the fiction with himself that it is not growing late.

‘Dear Sir Leicester, my honoured master,’ she softly whispers, ‘ must,
for your own good, and my duty, take the freedom of begging and
praying that you will not lie here in the lone darkness watching and
waiting and dragging through the time. Let me draw the curtains, and
light the candles, and make things more comfortable about you. The
church-clocks will strike the hours just the same, Sir Leicester, and
the night will pass away just the same. My Lady will come back, just
the same.’

T know it, Mrs Rouncewell, but I am weak--and he has been so long
gone.’

‘Not so very long, Sir Leicester. Not twenty-four hours yet.’
‘But that is a long time. Oh, it is a long time!’
He says it with a groan that wrings her heart.

She knows that this is not a period for bringing the rough light upon
him; she thinks his tears too sacred to be seen, even by her. Therefore
she sits in the darkness for a while without a word, then gently begins
to move about, now stirring the fire, now standing at the dark window
looking out. Finally he tells her, with recovered self-command, ‘As you
say, Mrs Rouncewell, it is no worse for being confessed. It is getting
late, and they are not come. Light the room!’ When it is lighted and
the weather shut out, it is only left to him to listen.

But they find that however dejected and ill he is, he brightens when a
quiet pretence is made of looking at the fires in her rooms and being
sure that everything is ready to receive her. Poor pretence as it is,
these allusions to her being expected keep up hope within him.

Midnight comes, and with it the same blank. The carriages in the
streets are few, and other late sounds in that neighbourhood there are
none, unless a man so very nomadically drunk as to stray into the
frigid zone goes brawling and bellowing along the pavement. Upon this
wintry night it is so still that listening to the intense silence is like
looking at intense darkness. If any distant sound be audible in this
case, it departs through the gloom like a feeble light in that, and all is
heavier than before.

The corporation of servants are dismissed to bed (not unwilling to go,
for they were up all last night), and only Mrs Rouncewell and George
keep watch in Sir Leicester's room. As the night lags tardily on--or
rather when it seems to stop altogether, at between two and three
o'clock--they find a restless craving on him to know more about the
weather, now he cannot see it. Hence George, patrolling regularly
every half-hour to the rooms so carefully looked after, extends his
march to the hall-door, looks about him, and brings back the best
report he can make of the worst of nights, the sleet still falling and
even the stone footways lying ankle- deep in icy sludge.

Volumnia, in her room up a retired landing on the staircase--the
second turning past the end of the carving and gilding, a cousinly
room containing a fearful abortion of a portrait of Sir Leicester
banished for its crimes, and commanding in the day a solemn yard
planted with dried-up shrubs like antediluvian specimens of black
tea--is a prey to horrors of many kinds. Not last nor least among
them, possibly, is a horror of what may befall her little income in the
event, as she expresses it, ‘of anything happening’ to Sir Leicester.
Anything, in this sense, meaning one thing only; and that the last
thing that can happen to the consciousness of any baronet in the
known world.

An effect of these horrors is that Volumnia finds she cannot go to bed
in her own room or sit by the fire in her own room, but must come
forth with her fair head tied up in a profusion of shawl, and her fair
form enrobed in drapery, and parade the mansion like a ghost,
particularly haunting the rooms, warm and luxurious, prepared for
one who still does not return. Solitude under such circumstances
being not to be thought of, Volumnia is attended by her maid, who,
impressed from her own bed for that purpose, extremely cold, very
sleepy, and generally an injured maid as condemned by
circumstances to take office with a cousin, when she had resolved to
be maid to nothing less than ten thousand a year, has not a sweet
expression of countenance.

The periodical visits of the trooper to these rooms, however, in the
course of his patrolling is an assurance of protection and company
both to mistress and maid, which renders them very acceptable in the
small hours of the night. Whenever he is heard advancing, they both
make some little decorative preparation to receive him; at other times
they divide their watches into short scraps of oblivion and dialogues
not wholly free from acerbity, as to whether Miss Dedlock, sitting with
her feet upon the fender, was or was not falling into the fire when
rescued (to her great displeasure) by her guardian genius the maid.

‘How is Sir Leicester now, Mr George?’ inquires Volumnia, adjusting
her cowl over her head.

‘Why, Sir Leicester is much the same, miss. He is very low and ill, and
he even wanders a little sometimes.’
‘Has he asked for me?’ inquires Volumnia tenderly.

‘Why, no, I can't say he has, miss. Not within my hearing, that is to

?

say.
‘This is a truly sad time, Mr George.’
‘Tt is indeed, miss. Hadn't you better go to bed?’

‘YYou had a deal better go to bed, Miss Dedlock,’ quoth the maid
sharply.

But Volumnia answers No! No! She may be asked for, she may be
wanted at a moment's notice. She never should forgive herself ‘if
anything was to happen’ and she was not on the spot. She declines to
enter on the question, mooted by the maid, how the spot comes to be
there, and not in her room (which is nearer to Sir Leicester's), but
staunchly declares that on the spot she will remain. Volumnia further
makes a merit of not having ‘closed an eye’--as if she had twenty or
thirty--though it is hard to reconcile this statement with her having
most indisputably opened two within five minutes.

But when it comes to four o'clock, and still the same blank,
Volumnia's constancy begins to fail her, or rather it begins to
strengthen, for she now considers that it is her duty to be ready for
the morrow, when much may be expected of her, that, in fact,
howsoever anxious to remain upon the spot, it may be required of her,
as an act of self-devotion, to desert the spot. So when the trooper
reappears with his, ‘Hadn't you better go to bed, miss?’ and when the
maid protests, more sharply than before, ‘You had a deal better go to
bed, Miss Dedlock!’ she meekly rises and says, ‘Do with me what you
think best!’

Mr George undoubtedly thinks it best to escort her on his arm to the
door of her cousinly chamber, and the maid as undoubtedly thinks it
best to hustle her into bed with mighty little ceremony. Accordingly,
these steps are taken; and now the trooper, in his rounds, has the
house to himself.

There is no improvement in the weather. From the portico, from the
eaves, from the parapet, from every ledge and post and pillar, drips
the thawed snow. It has crept, as if for shelter, into the lintels of the
great door--under it, into the corners of the windows, into every chink
and crevice of retreat, and there wastes and dies. It is falling still;
upon the roof, upon the skylight, even through the skylight, and drip,
drip, drip, with the regularity of the Ghost's Walk, on the stone floor
below.
The trooper, his old recollections awakened by the solitary grandeur of
a great house--no novelty to him once at Chesney Wold-- goes up the
stairs and through the chief rooms, holding up his light at arm's
length. Thinking of his varied fortunes within the last few weeks, and
of his rustic boyhood, and of the two periods of his life so strangely
brought together across the wide intermediate space; thinking of the
murdered man whose image is fresh in his mind; thinking of the lady
who has disappeared from these very rooms and the tokens of whose
recent presence are all here; thinking of the master of the house
upstairs and of the foreboding, ‘Who will tell him!’ he looks here and
looks there, and reflects how he MIGHT see something now, which it
would tax his boldness to walk up to, lay his hand upon, and prove to
be a fancy. But it is all blank, blank as the darkness above and below,
while he goes up the great staircase again, blank as the oppressive
silence.

‘All is still in readiness, George Rouncewell?’
‘Quite orderly and right, Sir Leicester.’

‘No word of any kind?’

The trooper shakes his head.

‘No letter that can possibly have been overlooked?’

But he knows there is no such hope as that and lays his head down
without looking for an answer.

Very familiar to him, as he said himself some hours ago, George
Rouncewell lifts him into easier positions through the long remainder
of the blank wintry night, and equally familiar with his unexpressed
wish, extinguishes the light and undraws the curtains at the first late
break of day. The day comes like a phantom. Cold, colourless, and
vague, it sends a warning streak before it of a deathlike hue, as if it
cried out, ‘Look what I am bringing you who watch there! Who will tell
him!’
CHAPTER LIX - Esther's Narrative

It was three o'clock in the morning when the houses outside London
did at last begin to exclude the country and to close us in with streets.
We had made our way along roads in a far worse condition than when
we had traversed them by daylight, both the fall and the thaw having
lasted ever since; but the energy of my companion never slackened. It
had only been, as I thought, of less assistance than the horses in
getting us on, and it had often aided them. They had stopped
exhausted half-way up hills, they had been driven through streams of
turbulent water, they had slipped down and become entangled with
the harness; but he and his little lantern had been always ready, and
when the mishap was set right, I had never heard any variation in his
cool, ‘Get on, my lads!’

The steadiness and confidence with which he had directed our journey
back I could not account for. Never wavering, he never even stopped to
make an inquiry until we were within a few miles of London. A very
few words, here and there, were then enough for him; and thus we
came, at between three and four o'clock in the morning, into Islington.

I will not dwell on the suspense and anxiety with which I reflected all
this time that we were leaving my mother farther and farther behind
every minute. I think I had some strong hope that he must be right
and could not fail to have a satisfactory object in following this
woman, but I tormented myself with questioning it and discussing it
during the whole journey. What was to ensue when we found her and
what could compensate us for this loss of time were questions also
that I could not possibly dismiss; my mind was quite tortured by long
dwelling on such reflections when we stopped.

We stopped in a high-street where there was a coach-stand. My
companion paid our two drivers, who were as completely covered with
splashes as if they had been dragged along the roads like the carriage
itself, and giving them some brief direction where to take it, lifted me
out of it and into a hackney-coach he had chosen from the rest.

‘Why, my dear!’ he said as he did this. ‘How wet you are!’

I had not been conscious of it. But the melted snow had found its way
into the carriage, and I had got out two or three times when a fallen
horse was plunging and had to be got up, and the wet had penetrated
my dress. I assured him it was no matter, but the driver, who knew
him, would not be dissuaded by me from running down the street to
his stable, whence he brought an armful of clean dry straw. They
shook it out and strewed it well about me, and I found it warm and
comfortable.
‘Now, my dear,’ said Mr Bucket, with his head in at the window after I
was shut up. ‘We're a-going to mark this person down. It may take a
little time, but you don't mind that. You're pretty sure that I've got a
motive. Ain't you?’

I little thought what it was, little thought in how short a time I should
understand it better, but I assured him that I had confidence in him.

‘So you may have, my dear,’ he returned. ‘And I tell you what! If you
only repose half as much confidence in me as I repose in you after
what I've experienced of you, that'll do. Lord! You're no trouble at all. I
never see a young woman in any station of society--and I've seen
many elevated ones too--conduct herself like you have conducted
yourself since you was called out of your bed. You're a pattern, you
know, that's what you are,’ said Mr Bucket warmly; ‘you're a pattern.’

I told him I was very glad, as indeed I was, to have been no hindrance
to him, and that I hoped I should be none now.

‘My dear,’ he returned, ‘when a young lady is as mild as she's game,
and as game as she's mild, that's all I ask, and more than I expect.
She then becomes a queen, and that's about what you are yourself.’

With these encouraging words--they really were encouraging to me
under those lonely and anxious circumstances--he got upon the box,
and we once more drove away. Where we drove I neither knew then
nor have ever known since, but we appeared to seek out the narrowest
and worst streets in London. Whenever I saw him directing the driver,
I was prepared for our descending into a deeper complication of such
streets, and we never failed to do so.

Sometimes we emerged upon a wider thoroughfare or came to a larger
building than the generality, well lighted. Then we stopped at offices
like those we had visited when we began our journey, and I saw him
in consultation with others. Sometimes he would get down by an
archway or at a street corner and mysteriously show the light of his
little lantern. This would attract similar lights from various dark
quarters, like so many insects, and a fresh consultation would be
held. By degrees we appeared to contract our search within narrower
and easier limits. Single police-officers on duty could now tell Mr
Bucket what he wanted to know and point to him where to go. At last
we stopped for a rather long conversation between him and one of
these men, which I supposed to be satisfactory from his manner of
nodding from time to time. When it was finished he came to me
looking very busy and very attentive.

‘Now, Miss Summerson,’ he said to me, ‘you won't be alarmed
whatever comes off, I know. It's not necessary for me to give you any
further caution than to tell you that we have marked this person down
and that you may be of use to me before I know it myself. I don't like
to ask such a thing, my dear, but would you walk a little way?’

Of course I got out directly and took his arm.
Tt ain't so easy to keep your feet,’ said Mr Bucket, ‘but take time.’

Although I looked about me confusedly and hurriedly as we crossed
the street, I thought I knew the place. ‘Are we in Holborn?’ I asked
him.

‘Yes,’ said Mr Bucket. ‘Do you know this turning?’
‘Tt looks like Chancery Lane.’
‘And was christened so, my dear,’ said Mr Bucket.

We turned down it, and as we went shuffling through the sleet, I
heard the clocks strike half-past five. We passed on in silence and as
quickly as we could with such a foot-hold, when some one coming
towards us on the narrow pavement, wrapped in a cloak, stopped and
stood aside to give me room. In the same moment I heard an
exclamation of wonder and my own name from Mr Woodcourt. I knew
his voice very well.

It was so unexpected and so--I don't know what to call it, whether
pleasant or painful--to come upon it after my feverish wandering
journey, and in the midst of the night, that I could not keep back the
tears from my eyes. It was like hearing his voice in a strange country.

‘My dear Miss Summerson, that you should be out at this hour, and
in such weather!’

He had heard from my guardian of my having been called away on
some uncommon business and said so to dispense with any
explanation. I told him that we had but just left a coach and were
going--but then I was obliged to look at my companion.

‘Why, you see, Mr Woodcourt’--he had caught the name from me--’we
are a-going at present into the next street. Inspector Bucket.’

Mr Woodcourt, disregarding my remonstrances, had hurriedly taken
off his cloak and was putting it about me. That's a good move, too,’
said Mr Bucket, assisting, ‘a very good move.’

‘May I go with you?’ said Mr Woodcourt. I don't know whether to me or
to my companion.
‘Why, Lord!’ exclaimed Mr Bucket, taking the answer on himself. ‘Of
course you may.’ It was all said in a moment, and they took me
between them, wrapped in the cloak.

T have just left Richard,’ said Mr Woodcourt. T have been sitting with
him since ten o'clock last night.’

‘Oh, dear me, he is ill!’

‘No, no, believe me; not ill, but not quite well. He was depressed and
faint--you know he gets so worried and so worn sometimes--and Ada
sent to me of course; and when I came home I found her note and
came straight here. Well! Richard revived so much after a little while,
and Ada was so happy and so convinced of its being my doing, though
God knows I had little enough to do with it, that I remained with him
until he had been fast asleep some hours. As fast asleep as she is
now, I hope!’

His friendly and familiar way of speaking of them, his unaffected
devotion to them, the grateful confidence with which I knew he had
inspired my darling, and the comfort he was to her; could I separate
all this from his promise to me? How thankless I must have been if it
had not recalled the words he said to me when he was so moved by
the change in my appearance: ‘1 will accept him as a trust, and it shall
be a sacred one!’

We now turned into another narrow street. ‘Mr Woodcourt,’ said Mr
Bucket, who had eyed him closely as we came along, ‘our business
takes us to a law-stationer's here, a certain Mr Snagsby's. What, you
know him, do you?’ He was so quick that he saw it in an instant.

‘Yes, I know a little of him and have called upon him at this place.’

‘Indeed, sir?’ said Mr Bucket. ‘Then you will be so good as to let me
leave Miss Summerson with you for a moment while I go and have half
a word with him?’

The last police-officer with whom he had conferred was standing
silently behind us. I was not aware of it until he struck in on my
saying I heard some one crying.

‘Don't be alarmed, miss,’ he returned. ‘t's Snagsby's servant.’

‘Why, you see,’ said Mr Bucket, ‘the girl's subject to fits, and has 'em
bad upon her to-night. A most contrary circumstance it is, for I want
certain information out of that girl, and she must be brought to
reason somehow.’
‘At all events, they wouldn't be up yet if it wasn't for her, Mr Bucket,’
said the other man. ‘She's been at it pretty well all night, sir.’

‘Well, that's true,’ he returned. ‘My light's burnt out. Show yours a
moment.’

All this passed in a whisper a door or two from the house in which I
could faintly hear crying and moaning. In the little round of light
produced for the purpose, Mr Bucket went up to the door and
knocked. The door was opened after he had knocked twice, and he
went in, leaving us standing in the street.

‘Miss Summerson,’ said Mr Woodcourt, ‘if without obtruding myself on
your confidence I may remain near you, pray let me do so.’

‘You are truly kind,’ I answered. I need wish to keep no secret of my
own from you; if I keep any, it is another's.’

T quite understand. Trust me, I will remain near you only so long as I
can fully respect it.’

T trust implicitly to you,’ I said. ‘I know and deeply feel how sacredly
you keep your promise.’

After a short time the little round of light shone out again, and Mr
Bucket advanced towards us in it with his earnest face. ‘Please to
come in, Miss Summerson,’ he said, ‘and sit down by the fire. Mr
Woodcourt, from information I have received I understand you are a
medical man. Would you look to this girl and see if anything can be
done to bring her round. She has a letter somewhere that I
particularly want. It's not in her box, and I think it must be about her;
but she is so twisted and clenched up that she is difficult to handle
without hurting.’

We all three went into the house together; although it was cold and
raw, it smelt close too from being up all night. In the passage behind
the door stood a scared, sorrowful-looking little man in a grey coat
who seemed to have a naturally polite manner and spoke meekly.

‘Downstairs, if you please, Mr Bucket,’ said he. ‘The lady will excuse
the front kitchen; we use it as our workaday sitting-room. The back is
Guster's bedroom, and in it she's a-carrying on, poor thing, to a
frightful extent!’

We went downstairs, followed by Mr Snagsby, as I soon found the little
man to be. In the front kitchen, sitting by the fire, was Mrs Snagsby,
with very red eyes and a very severe expression of face.
‘My little woman,’ said Mr Snagsby, entering behind us, ‘to wave-- not
to put too fine a point upon it, my dear--hostilities for one single
moment in the course of this prolonged night, here is Inspector
Bucket, Mr Woodcourt, and a lady.’

She looked very much astonished, as she had reason for doing, and
looked particularly hard at me.

‘My little woman,’ said Mr Snagsby, sitting down in the remotest
corner by the door, as if he were taking a liberty, ‘it is not unlikely
that you may inquire of me why Inspector Bucket, Mr Woodcourt, and
a lady call upon us in Cook's Court, Cursitor Street, at the present
hour. I don't know. I have not the least idea. If I was to be informed, I
should despair of understanding, and I'd rather not be told.’

He appeared so miserable, sitting with his head upon his hand, and I
appeared so unwelcome, that I was going to offer an apology when Mr
Bucket took the matter on himself.

‘Now, Mr Snagsby,’ said he, ‘the best thing you can do is to go along
with Mr Woodcourt to look after your Guster--’

‘My Guster, Mr Bucket!’ cried Mr Snagsby. ‘Go on, sir, go on. I shall be
charged with that next.’

‘And to hold the candle,’ pursued Mr Bucket without correcting
himself, ‘or hold her, or make yourself useful in any way you're asked.
Which there's not a man alive more ready to do, for you're a man of
urbanity and suavity, you know, and you've got the sort of heart that
can feel for another. Mr Woodcourt, would you be so good as see to
her, and if you can get that letter from her, to let me have it as soon
as ever you can?’

As they went out, Mr Bucket made me sit down in a corner by the fire
and take off my wet shoes, which he turned up to dry upon the
fender, talking all the time.

‘Don't you be at all put out, miss, by the want of a hospitable look
from Mrs Snagsby there, because she's under a mistake altogether.
She'll find that out sooner than will be agreeable to a lady of her
generally correct manner of forming her thoughts, because I'm a-going
to explain it to her.’ Here, standing on the hearth with his wet hat and
shawls in his hand, himself a pile of wet, he turned to Mrs Snagsby.
‘Now, the first thing that I say to you, as a married woman possessing
what you may call charms, you know--'Believe Me, if All Those
Endearing,' and cetrer--you're well acquainted with the song, because
it's in vain for you to tell me that you and good society are strangers--
charms--attractions, mind you, that ought to give you confidence in
yourself--is, that you've done it.’

Mrs Snagsby looked rather alarmed, relented a little and faltered,
what did Mr Bucket mean.

‘What does Mr Bucket mean?’ he repeated, and I saw by his face that
all the time he talked he was listening for the discovery of the letter, to
my own great agitation, for I knew then how important it must be; T'll
tell you what he means, ma'am. Go and see Othello acted. That's the
tragedy for you.’

Mrs Snagsby consciously asked why.

‘Why?’ said Mr Bucket. ‘Because you'll come to that if you don't look
out. Why, at the very moment while I speak, I know what your mind's
not wholly free from respecting this young lady. But shall I tell you
who this young lady is? Now, come, you're what I call an intellectual
woman--with your soul too large for your body, if you come to that,
and chafing it--and you know me, and you recollect where you saw me
last, and what was talked of in that circle. Don't you? Yes! Very well.
This young lady is that young lady.’

Mrs Snagsby appeared to understand the reference better than I did
at the time.

‘And Toughey--him as you call Jo--was mixed up in the same
business, and no other; and the law-writer that you know of was
mixed up in the same business, and no other; and your husband,
with no more knowledge of it than your great grandfather, was mixed
up (by Mr Tulkinghorn, deceased, his best customer) in the same
business, and no other; and the whole bileing of people was mixed up
in the same business, and no other. And yet a married woman,
possessing your attractions, shuts her eyes (and sparklers too), and
goes and runs her delicate-formed head against a wall. Why, I am
ashamed of you! (I expected Mr Woodcourt might have got it by this
time.)’

Mrs Snagsby shook her head and put her handkerchief to her eyes.

Ts that all?’ said Mr Bucket excitedly. ‘No. See what happens. Another
person mixed up in that business and no other, a person in a
wretched state, comes here to-night and is seen a-speaking to your
maid-servant; and between her and your maid-servant there passes a
paper that I would give a hundred pound for, down. What do you do?
You hide and you watch 'em, and you pounce upon that maid-
servant--knowing what she's subject to and what a little thing will
bring 'em on--in that surprising manner and with that severity that,
by the Lord, she goes off and keeps off, when a life may be hanging
upon that girl's words!’

He so thoroughly meant what he said now that I involuntarily clasped
my hands and felt the room turning away from me. But it stopped. Mr
Woodcourt came in, put a paper into his hand, and went away again.

‘Now, Mrs Snagsby, the only amends you can make,’ said Mr Bucket,
rapidly glancing at it, ‘is to let me speak a word to this young lady in
private here. And if you know of any help that you can give to that
gentleman in the next kitchen there or can think of any one thing
that's likelier than another to bring the girl round, do your swiftest
and best!’ In an instant she was gone, and he had shut the door. ‘Now
my dear, you're steady and quite sure of yourself?’

‘Quite,’ said I. ‘Whose writing is that?’

It was my mother's. A pencil-writing, on a crushed and torn piece of
paper, blotted with wet. Folded roughly like a letter, and directed to
me at my guardian's.

‘You know the hand,’ he said, ‘and if you are firm enough to read it to
me, do! But be particular to a word.’

It had been written in portions, at different times. I read what follows:

T came to the cottage with two objects. First, to see the dear one, if I
could, once more--but only to see her--not to speak to her or let her
know that I was near. The other object, to elude pursuit and to be
lost. Do not blame the mother for her share. The assistance that she
rendered me, she rendered on my strongest assurance that it was for
the dear one's good. You remember her dead child. The men's consent
I bought, but her help was freely given.’

“I came.’ That was written,’ said my companion, ‘when she rested
there. It bears out what I made of it. I was right.’

The next was written at another time:

T have wandered a long distance, and for many hours, and I know
that I must soon die. These streets! I have no purpose but to die.
When I left, I had a worse, but I am saved from adding that guilt to the
rest. Cold, wet, and fatigue are sufficient causes for my being found
dead, but I shall die of others, though I suffer from these. It was right
that all that had sustained me should give way at once and that I
should die of terror and my conscience.’

‘Take courage,’ said Mr Bucket. ‘There's only a few words more.’
Those, too, were written at another time. To all appearance, almost in
the dark:

T have done all I could do to be lost. I shall be soon forgotten so, and
shall disgrace him least. I have nothing about me by which I can be
recognized. This paper I part with now. The place where I shall lie
down, if I can get so far, has been often in my mind. Farewell. Forgive.’

Mr Bucket, supporting me with his arm, lowered me gently into my
chair. ‘Cheer up! Don't think me hard with you, my dear, but as soon
as ever you feel equal to it, get your shoes on and be ready.’

I did as he required, but I was left there a long time, praying for my
unhappy mother. They were all occupied with the poor girl, and I
heard Mr Woodcourt directing them and speaking to her often. At
length he came in with Mr Bucket and said that as it was important to
address her gently, he thought it best that I should ask her for
whatever information we desired to obtain. There was no doubt that
she could now reply to questions if she were soothed and not alarmed.
The questions, Mr Bucket said, were how she came by the letter, what
passed between her and the person who gave her the letter, and where
the person went. Holding my mind as steadily as I could to these
points, I went into the next room with them. Mr Woodcourt would
have remained outside, but at my solicitation went in with us.

The poor girl was sitting on the floor where they had laid her down.
They stood around her, though at a little distance, that she might
have air. She was not pretty and looked weak and poor, but she had a
plaintive and a good face, though it was still a little wild. I kneeled on
the ground beside her and put her poor head upon my shoulder,
whereupon she drew her arm round my neck and burst into tears.

‘My poor girl,’ said I, laying my face against her forehead, for indeed I
was crying too, and trembling, ‘it seems cruel to trouble you now, but
more depends on our knowing something about this letter than I
could tell you in an hour.’

She began piteously declaring that she didn't mean any harm, she
didn't mean any harm, Mrs Snagsby!

‘We are all sure of that,’ said I. ‘But pray tell me how you got it.’

Yes, dear lady, I will, and tell you true. I'll tell true, indeed, Mrs
Snagsby.’

T am sure of that,’ said I. ‘And how was it?’
T had been out on an errand, dear lady--long after it was dark-- quite
late; and when I came home, I found a common-looking person, all
wet and muddy, looking up at our house. When she saw me coming in
at the door, she called me back and said did I live here. And I said yes,
and she said she knew only one or two places about here, but had lost
her way and couldn't find them. Oh, what shall I do, what shall I do!
They won't believe me! She didn't say any harm to me, and I! didn't say
any harm to her, indeed, Mrs Snagsby!’

It was necessary for her mistress to comfort her--which she did, I
must say, with a good deal of contrition--before she could be got
beyond this.

‘She could not find those places,’ said I.

‘No!’ cried the girl, shaking her head. ‘No! Couldn't find them. And she
was so faint, and lame, and miserable, Oh so wretched, that if you
had seen her, Mr Snagsby, you'd have given her half a crown, I know!’

‘Well, Guster, my girl,’ said he, at first not knowing what to say. 1
hope I should.’

‘And yet she was so well spoken,’ said the girl, looking at me with wide
open eyes, ‘that it made a person's heart bleed. And so she said to me,
did I know the way to the burying ground? And I asked her which
burying ground. And she said, the poor burying ground. And so I told
her I had been a poor child myself, and it was according to parishes.
But she said she meant a poor burying ground not very far from here,
where there was an archway, and a step, and an iron gate.’

As I watched her face and soothed her to go on, I saw that Mr Bucket
received this with a look which I could not separate from one of alarm.

‘Oh, dear, dear!’ cried the girl, pressing her hair back with her hands.
‘What shall I do, what shall I do! She meant the burying ground where
the man was buried that took the sleeping-stuff--that you came home
and told us of, Mr Snagsby--that frightened me so, Mrs Snagsby. Oh, I
am frightened again. Hold me!’

‘You are so much better now,’ sald I. ‘Pray, pray tell me more.’

‘Yes I will, yes I will! But don't be angry with me, that's a dear lady,
because I have been so ill.’

Angry with her, poor soul!

‘There! Now I will, now I will. So she said, could I tell her how to find
it, and I said yes, and I told her; and she looked at me with eyes like
almost as if she was blind, and herself all waving back. And so she
took out the letter, and showed it me, and said if she was to put that
in the post-office, it would be rubbed out and not minded and never
sent; and would I take it from her, and send it, and the messenger
would be paid at the house. And so I said yes, if it was no harm, and
she said no--no harm. And so I took it from her, and she said she had
nothing to give me, and I said I was poor myself and consequently
wanted nothing. And so she said God bless you, and went.’

‘And did she go--’

‘Yes,’ cried the girl, anticipating the inquiry. ‘Yes! She went the way I
had shown her. Then I came in, and Mrs Snagsby came behind me
from somewhere and laid hold of me, and I was frightened.’

Mr Woodcourt took her kindly from me. Mr Bucket wrapped me up,
and immediately we were in the street. Mr Woodcourt hesitated, but I
said, ‘Don't leave me now!’ and Mr Bucket added, ‘You'll be better with
us, we may want you; don't lose time!’

I have the most confused impressions of that walk. I recollect that it
was neither night nor day, that morning was dawning but the street-
lamps were not yet put out, that the sleet was still falling and that all
the ways were deep with it. I recollect a few chilled people passing in
the streets. I recollect the wet house-tops, the clogged and bursting
gutters and water-spouts, the mounds of blackened ice and snow over
which we passed, the narrowness of the courts by which we went. At
the same time I remember that the poor girl seemed to be yet telling
her story audibly and plainly in my hearing, that I could feel her
resting on my arm, that the stained house-fronts put on human
shapes and looked at me, that great water-gates seemed to be opening
and closing in my head or in the air, and that the unreal things were
more substantial than the real.

At last we stood under a dark and miserable covered way, where one
lamp was burning over an iron gate and where the morning faintly
struggled in. The gate was closed. Beyond it was a burial ground --a
dreadful spot in which the night was very slowly stirring, but where I
could dimly see heaps of dishonoured graves and stones, hemmed in
by filthy houses with a few dull lights in their windows and on whose
walls a thick humidity broke out like a disease. On the step at the
gate, drenched in the fearful wet of such a place, which oozed and
splashed down everywhere, I saw, with a cry of pity and horror, a
woman lying--Jenny, the mother of the dead child.

I ran forward, but they stopped me, and Mr Woodcourt entreated me
with the greatest earnestness, even with tears, before I went up to the
figure to listen for an instant to what Mr Bucket said. I did so, as I
thought. I did so, as I am sure.

‘Miss Summerson, you'll understand me, if you think a moment. They
changed clothes at the cottage.’

They changed clothes at the cottage. I could repeat the words in my
mind, and I knew what they meant of themselves, but I attached no
meaning to them in any other connexion.

‘And one returned,’ said Mr Bucket, ‘and one went on. And the one
that went on only went on a certain way agreed upon to deceive and
then turned across country and went home. Think a moment!’

I could repeat this in my mind too, but I had not the least idea what it
meant. I saw before me, lying on the step, the mother of the dead
child. She lay there with one arm creeping round a bar of the iron gate
and seeming to embrace it. She lay there, who had so lately spoken to
my mother. She lay there, a distressed, unsheltered, senseless
creature. She who had brought my mother's letter, who could give me
the only clue to where my mother was; she, who was to guide us to
rescue and save her whom we had sought so far, who had come to
this condition by some means connected with my mother that I could
not follow, and might be passing beyond our reach and help at that
moment; she lay there, and they stopped me! I saw but did not
comprehend the solemn and compassionate look in Mr Woodcourt's
face. I saw but did not comprehend his touching the other on the
breast to keep him back. I saw him stand uncovered in the bitter air,
with a reverence for something. But my understanding for all this was
gone.

I even heard it said between them, ‘Shall she go?’

‘She had better go. Her hands should be the first to touch her. They
have a higher right than ours.’

I passed on to the gate and stooped down. I lifted the heavy head, put
the long dank hair aside, and turned the face. And it was my mother,
cold and dead.
CHAPTER LX - Perspective

I proceed to other passages of my narrative. From the goodness of all
about me I derived such consolation as I can never think of unmoved.
I have already said so much of myself, and so much still remains, that
I will not dwell upon my sorrow. I had an illness, but it was not a long
one; and I would avoid even this mention of it if I could quite keep
down the recollection of their sympathy.

I proceed to other passages of my narrative.

During the time of my illness, we were still in London, where Mrs
Woodcourt had come, on my guardian's invitation, to stay with us.
When my guardian thought me well and cheerful enough to talk with
him in our old way--though I could have done that sooner if he would
have believed me--I resumed my work and my chair beside his. He
had appointed the time himself, and we were alone.

‘Dame Trot,’ said he, receiving me with a kiss, ‘welcome to the
growlery again, my dear. I have a scheme to develop, little woman. I
propose to remain here, perhaps for six months, perhaps for a longer
time--as it may be. Quite to settle here for a while, in short.’

‘And in the meanwhile leave Bleak House?’ said I.

‘Aye, my dear? Bleak House,’ he returned, ‘must learn to take care of
itself.’

I thought his tone sounded sorrowful, but looking at him, I saw his
kind face lighted up by its pleasantest smile.

‘Bleak House,’ he repeated--and his tone did NOT sound sorrowful, I
found--’must learn to take care of itself. It is a long way from Ada, my
dear, and Ada stands much in need of you.’

It's like you, guardian,’ said I, ‘to have been taking that into
consideration for a happy surprise to both of us.’

‘Not so disinterested either, my dear, if you mean to extol me for that
virtue, since if you were generally on the road, you could be seldom
with me. And besides, I wish to hear as much and as often of Ada as I
can in this condition of estrangement from poor Rick. Not of her alone,
but of him too, poor fellow.’

‘Have you seen Mr Woodcourt, this morning, guardian?’

IT see Mr Woodcourt every morning, Dame Durden.’
‘Does he still say the same of Richard?’

Just the same. He knows of no direct bodily illness that he has; on
the contrary, he believes that he has none. Yet he is not easy about
him; who CAN be?’

My dear girl had been to see us lately every day, some times twice in a
day. But we had foreseen, all along, that this would only last until I
was quite myself. We knew full well that her fervent heart was as full
of affection and gratitude towards her cousin John as it had ever
been, and we acquitted Richard of laying any injunctions upon her to
stay away; but we knew on the other hand that she felt it a part of her
duty to him to be sparing of her visits at our house. My guardian's
delicacy had soon perceived this and had tried to convey to her that
he thought she was right.

‘Dear, unfortunate, mistaken Richard,’ said I. ‘When will he awake
from his delusion!’

‘He is not in the way to do so now, my dear,’ replied my guardian. ‘The
more he suffers, the more averse he will be to me, having made me the
principal representative of the great occasion of his suffering.’

I could not help adding, ‘So unreasonably!’

‘Ah, Dame Trot, Dame Trot,’ returned my guardian, ‘what shall we find
reasonable in Jarndyce and Jarndyce! Unreason and injustice at the
top, unreason and injustice at the heart and at the bottom, unreason
and injustice from beginning to end--if it ever has an end--how should
poor Rick, always hovering near it, pluck reason out of itP He no more
gathers grapes from thorns or figs from thistles than older men did in
old times.’

His gentleness and consideration for Richard whenever we spoke of
him touched me so that I was always silent on this subject very soon.

T suppose the Lord Chancellor, and the Vice Chancellors, and the
whole Chancery battery of great guns would be infinitely astonished
by such unreason and injustice in one of their suitors,’ pursued my
guardian. ‘When those learned gentlemen begin to raise moss-roses
from the powder they sow in their wigs, I shall begin to be astonished
too!’

He checked himself in glancing towards the window to look where the
wind was and leaned on the back of my chair instead.

‘Well, well, little woman! To go on, my dear. This rock we must leave to
time, chance, and hopeful circumstance. We must not shipwreck Ada
upon it. She cannot afford, and he cannot afford, the remotest chance
of another separation from a friend. Therefore I have particularly
begged of Woodcourt, and I now particularly beg of you, my dear, not
to move this subject with Rick. Let it rest. Next week, next month,
next year, sooner or later, he will see me with clearer eyes. I can wait.’

But I had already discussed it with him, I confessed; and so, I
thought, had Mr Woodcourt.

‘So he tells me,’ returned my guardian. ‘Very good. He has made his
protest, and Dame Durden has made hers, and there is nothing more
to be said about it. Now I come to Mrs Woodcourt. How do you like
her, my dear?’

In answer to this question, which was oddly abrupt, I said I liked her
very much and thought she was more agreeable than she used to be.

T think so too,’ said my guardian. ‘Less pedigree? Not so much of
Morgan ap--what's his name?’

That was what I meant, I acknowledged, though he was a very
harmless person, even when we had had more of him.

‘Still, upon the whole, he is as well in his native mountains,’ said my
guardian. I agree with you. Then, little woman, can I do better for a
time than retain Mrs Woodcourt here?’

No. And yet--
My guardian looked at me, waiting for what I had to say.

I had nothing to say. At least I had nothing in my mind that I could
say. I had an undefined impression that it might have been better if
we had had some other inmate, but I could hardly have explained why
even to myself. Or, if to myself, certainly not to anybody else.

‘You see,’ said my guardian, ‘our neighbourhood is in Woodcourt's
way, and he can come here to see her as often as he likes, which is
agreeable to them both; and she is familiar to us and fond of you.’

Yes. That was undeniable. I had nothing to say against it. I could not
have suggested a better arrangement, but I was not quite easy in my
mind. Esther, Esther, why not? Esther, think!

Tt is a very good plan indeed, dear guardian, and we could not do
better.’

‘Sure, little woman?’
Quite sure. I had had a moment's time to think, since I had urged that
duty on myself, and I was quite sure.

‘Good,’ said my guardian. ‘It shall be done. Carried unanimously.’
‘Carried unanimously,’ I repeated, going on with my work.

It was a cover for his book-table that I happened to be ornamenting. It
had been laid by on the night preceding my sad journey and never
resumed. I showed it to him now, and he admired it highly. After I had
explained the pattern to him and all the great effects that were to
come out by and by, I thought I would go back to our last theme.

‘YYou said, dear guardian, when we spoke of Mr Woodcourt before Ada
left us, that you thought he would give a long trial to another country.
Have you been advising him since?’

Yes, little woman, pretty often.’

‘Has he decided to do so?’

T rather think not.’

‘Some other prospect has opened to him, perhaps?’ said I.

‘Why--yes--perhaps,’ returned my guardian, beginning his answer ina
very deliberate manner. ‘About half a year hence or so, there is a
medical attendant for the poor to be appointed at a certain place in
Yorkshire. It is a thriving place, pleasantly situated--streams and
streets, town and country, mill and moor--and seems to present an
opening for such a man. I mean a man whose hopes and aims may
sometimes lie (as most men's sometimes do, I dare say) above the
ordinary level, but to whom the ordinary level will be high enough
after all if it should prove to be a way of usefulness and good service
leading to no other. All generous spirits are ambitious, I suppose, but
the ambition that calmly trusts itself to such a road, instead of
spasmodically trying to fly over it, is of the kind I care for. It is
Woodcourt's kind.’

‘And will he get this appointment?’ I asked.

‘Why, little woman,’ returned my guardian, smiling, ‘not being an
oracle, I cannot confidently say, but I think so. His reputation stands
very high; there were people from that part of the country in the
shipwreck; and strange to say, I believe the best man has the best
chance. You must not suppose it to be a fine endowment. It is a very,
very commonplace affair, my dear, an appointment to a great amount
of work and a small amount of pay; but better things will gather about
it, it may be fairly hoped.’

‘The poor of that place will have reason to bless the choice if it falls on
Mr Woodcourt, guardian.’

‘You are right, little woman; that Iam sure they will.’

We said no more about it, nor did he say a word about the future of
Bleak House. But it was the first time I had taken my seat at his side
in my mourning dress, and that accounted for it, I considered.

I now began to visit my dear girl every day in the dull dark corner
where she lived. The morning was my usual time, but whenever I
found I had an hour or so to spare, I put on my bonnet and bustled off
to Chancery Lane. They were both so glad to see me at all hours, and
used to brighten up so when they heard me opening the door and
coming in (being quite at home, I never knocked), that I had no fear of
becoming troublesome just yet.

On these occasions I frequently found Richard absent. At other times
he would be writing or reading papers in the cause at that table of his,
so covered with papers, which was never disturbed. Sometimes I
would come upon him lingering at the door of Mr Vholes's office.
Sometimes I would meet him in the neighbourhood lounging about
and biting his nails. I often met him wandering in Lincoln's Inn, near
the place where I had first seen him, oh how different, how different!

That the money Ada brought him was melting away with the candles I
used to see burning after dark in Mr Vholes's office I knew very well. It
was not a large amount in the beginning, he had married in debt, and
I could not fail to understand, by this time, what was meant by Mr
Vholes's shoulder being at the wheel--as I still heard it was. My dear
made the best of housekeepers and tried hard to save, but I knew that
they were getting poorer and poorer every day.

She shone in the miserable corner like a beautiful star. She adorned
and graced it so that it became another place. Paler than she had
been at home, and a little quieter than I had thought natural when
she was yet so cheerful and hopeful, her face was so unshadowed that
I half believed she was blinded by her love for Richard to his ruinous
career.

I went one day to dine with them while I was under this impression.
As I turned into Symond's Inn, I met little Miss Flite coming out. She
had been to make a stately call upon the wards in Jarndyce, as she
still called them, and had derived the highest gratification from that
ceremony. Ada had already told me that she called every Monday at
five o'clock, with one little extra white bow in her bonnet, which never
appeared there at any other time, and with her largest reticule of
documents on her arm.

‘My dear!’ she began. ‘So delighted! How do you do! So glad to see you.
And you are going to visit our interesting Jarndyce wards? TO be sure!
Our beauty is at home, my dear, and will be charmed to see you.’

‘Then Richard is not come in yet?’ said I. I am glad of that, for I was
afraid of being a little late.’

‘No, he is not come in,’ returned Miss Flite. ‘He has had a long day in
court. I left him there with Vholes. You don't like Vholes, I hope?
DON'T like Vholes. Dan-gerous man!’

T am afraid you see Richard oftener than ever now,’ said I.

‘My dearest,’ returned Miss Flite, ‘daily and hourly. You know what I
told you of the attraction on the Chancellor's table? My dear, next to
myself he is the most constant suitor in court. He begins quite to
amuse our little party. Ve-ry friendly little party, are we not?’

It was miserable to hear this from her poor mad lips, though it was no
surprise.

In short, my valued friend,’ pursued Miss Flite, advancing her lips to
my ear with an air of equal patronage and mystery, I must tell you a
secret. I have made him my executor. Nominated, constituted, and
appointed him. In my will. Ye-es.’

Indeed?’ said I.

‘Ye-es,’ repeated Miss Flite in her most genteel accents, ‘my executor,
administrator, and assign. (Our Chancery phrases, my love.) I have
reflected that if I should wear out, he will be able to watch that
judgment. Being so very regular in his attendance.’

It made me sigh to think of him.

T did at one time mean,’ said Miss Flite, echoing the sigh, ‘to
nominate, constitute, and appoint poor Gridley. Also very regular, my
charming girl. I assure you, most exemplary! But he wore out, poor
man, so I have appointed his successor. Don't mention it. This is in
confidence.’

She carefully opened her reticule a little way and showed me a folded
piece of paper inside as the appointment of which she spoke.
‘Another secret, my dear. I have added to my collection of birds.’

‘Really, Miss Flite?’ said I, knowing how it pleased her to have her
confidence received with an appearance of interest.

She nodded several times, and her face became overcast and gloomy.
‘Two more. I call them the Wards in Jarndyce. They are caged up with
all the others. With Hope, Joy, Youth, Peace, Rest, Life, Dust, Ashes,
Waste, Want, Ruin, Despair, Madness, Death, Cunning, Folly, Words,
Wigs, Rags, Sheepskin, Plunder, Precedent, Jargon, Gammon, and
Spinach!’

The poor soul kissed me with the most troubled look I had ever seen
in her and went her way. Her manner of running over the names of
her birds, as if she were afraid of hearing them even from her own
lips, quite chilled me.

This was not a cheering preparation for my visit, and I could have
dispensed with the company of Mr Vholes, when Richard (who arrived
within a minute or two after me) brought him to share our dinner.
Although it was a very plain one, Ada and Richard were for some
minutes both out of the room together helping to get ready what we
were to eat and drink. Mr Vholes took that opportunity of holding a
little conversation in a low voice with me. He came to the window
where I was sitting and began upon Symond's Inn.

‘A dull place, Miss Summerson, for a life that is not an official one,’
said Mr Vholes, smearing the glass with his black glove to make it
clearer for me.

‘There is not much to see here,’ said I.

‘Nor to hear, miss,’ returned Mr Vholes. ‘A little music does
occasionally stray in, but we are not musical in the law and soon eject
it. I hope Mr Jarndyce is as well as his friends could wish him?’

I thanked Mr Vholes and said he was quite well.

T have not the pleasure to be admitted among the number of his
friends myself,’ said Mr Vholes, ‘and I am aware that the gentlemen of
our profession are sometimes regarded in such quarters with an
unfavourable eye. Our plain course, however, under good report and
evil report, and all kinds of prejudice (we are the victims of prejudice),
is to have everything openly carried on. How do you find Mr C.
looking, Miss Summerson?’

‘He looks very ill. Dreadfully anxious.’
Just so,’ said Mr Vholes.

He stood behind me with his long black figure reaching nearly to the
ceiling of those low rooms, feeling the pimples on his face as if they
were ornaments and speaking inwardly and evenly as though there
were not a human passion or emotion in his nature.

‘Mr Woodcourt is in attendance upon Mr C., I believe?’ he resumed.
‘Mr Woodcourt is his disinterested friend,’ I answered.

‘But I mean in professional attendance, medical attendance.’

‘That can do little for an unhappy mind,’ said I.

Just so,’ said Mr Vholes.

So slow, so eager, so bloodless and gaunt, I felt as if Richard were
wasting away beneath the eyes of this adviser and there were
something of the vampire in him.

‘Miss Summerson,’ said Mr Vholes, very slowly rubbing his gloved
hands, as if, to his cold sense of touch, they were much the same in
black kid or out of it, ‘this was an ill-advised marriage of Mr C.'s.’

I begged he would excuse me from discussing it. They had been
engaged when they were both very young, I told him (a little
indignantly) and when the prospect before them was much fairer and
brighter. When Richard had not yielded himself to the unhappy
influence which now darkened his life.

‘Just so,’ assented Mr Vholes again. ‘Still, with a view to everything
being openly carried on, I will, with your permission, Miss
Summerson, observe to you that I consider this a very ill- advised
marriage indeed. I owe the opinion not only to Mr C.'s connexions,
against whom I should naturally wish to protect myself, but also to
my own reputation--dear to myself as a professional man aiming to
keep respectable; dear to my three girls at home, for whom I am
striving to realize some little independence; dear, I will even say, to my
aged father, whom it is my privilege to support.’

It would become a very different marriage, a much happier and better
marriage, another marriage altogether, Mr Vholes,’ said I, ‘if Richard
were persuaded to turn his back on the fatal pursuit in which you are
engaged with him.’
Mr Vholes, with a noiseless cough--or rather gasp--into one of his
black gloves, inclined his head as if he did not wholly dispute even
that.

‘Miss Summerson,’ he said, ‘it may be so; and I freely admit that the
young lady who has taken Mr C.'s name upon herself in so ill- advised
a manner--you will I am sure not quarrel with me for throwing out
that remark again, as a duty I owe to Mr C.'s connexions--is a highly
genteel young lady. Business has prevented me from mixing much
with general society in any but a professional character; still I trust I
am competent to perceive that she is a highly genteel young lady. As
to beauty, I am not a judge of that myself, and I never did give much
attention to it from a boy, but I dare say the young lady is equally
eligible in that point of view. She is considered so (I have heard)
among the clerks in the Inn, and it is a point more in their way than
in mine. In reference to Mr C.'s pursuit of his interests--’

‘Oh! His interests, Mr Vholes!’

‘Pardon me,’ returned Mr Vholes, going on in exactly the same inward
and dispassionate manner. ‘Mr C. takes certain interests under
certain wills disputed in the suit. It is a term we use. In reference to
Mr C,'s pursuit of his interests, I mentioned to you, Miss Summerson,
the first time I had the pleasure of seeing you, in my desire that
everything should be openly carried on--I used those words, for I
happened afterwards to note them in my diary, which is producible at
any time--I mentioned to you that Mr C. had laid down the principle of
watching his own interests, and that when a client of mine laid down
a principle which was not of an immoral (that is to say, unlawful)
nature, it devolved upon me to carry it out. I HAVE carried it out; I do
carry it out. But I will not smooth things over to any connexion of Mr
C.'s on any account. As open as I was to Mr Jarndyce, I am to you. I
regard it in the light of a professional duty to be so, though it can be
charged to no one. I openly say, unpalatable as it may be, that I
consider Mr C.'s affairs in a very bad way, that I consider Mr C.
himself in a very bad way, and that I regard this as an exceedingly ill-
advised marriage. Am I here, sir? Yes, I thank you; I am here, Mr C.,
and enjoying the pleasure of some agreeable conversation with Miss
Summerson, for which I have to thank you very much, sir!’

He broke off thus in answer to Richard, who addressed him as he
came into the room. By this time I too well understood Mr Vholes's
scrupulous way of saving himself and his respectability not to feel that
our worst fears did but keep pace with his client's progress.

We sat down to dinner, and I had an opportunity of observing
Richard, anxiously. I was not disturbed by Mr Vholes (who took off his
gloves to dine), though he sat opposite to me at the small table, for I
doubt if, looking up at all, he once removed his eyes from his host's
face. I found Richard thin and languid, slovenly in his dress,
abstracted in his manner, forcing his spirits now and then, and at
other intervals relapsing into a dull thoughtfulness. About his large
bright eyes that used to be so merry there was a wanness and a
restlessness that changed them altogether. I cannot use the
expression that he looked old. There is a ruin of youth which is not
like age, and into such a ruin Richard's youth and youthful beauty
had all fallen away.

He ate little and seemed indifferent what it was, showed himself to be
much more impatient than he used to be, and was quick even with
Ada. I thought at first that his old light-hearted manner was all gone,
but it shone out of him sometimes as I had occasionally known little
momentary glimpses of my own old face to look out upon me from the
glass. His laugh had not quite left him either, but it was like the echo
of a joyful sound, and that is always sorrowful.

Yet he was as glad as ever, in his old affectionate way, to have me
there, and we talked of the old times pleasantly. These did not appear
to be interesting to Mr Vholes, though he occasionally made a gasp
which I believe was his smile. He rose shortly after dinner and said
that with the permission of the ladies he would retire to his office.

‘Always devoted to business, Vholes!’ cried Richard.

Yes, Mr C.,’ he returned, ‘the interests of clients are never to be
neglected, sir. They are paramount in the thoughts of a professional
man like myself, who wishes to preserve a good name among his
fellow-practitioners and society at large. My denying myself the
pleasure of the present agreeable conversation may not be wholly
irrespective of your own interests, Mr C.’

Richard expressed himself quite sure of that and lighted Mr Vholes
out. On his return he told us, more than once, that Vholes was a good
fellow, a safe fellow, a man who did what he pretended to do, a very
good fellow indeed! He was so defiant about it that it struck me he had
begun to doubt Mr Vholes.

Then he threw himself on the sofa, tired out; and Ada and I put things
to rights, for they had no other servant than the woman who attended
to the chambers. My dear girl had a cottage piano there and quietly
sat down to sing some of Richard's favourites, the lamp being first
removed into the next room, as he complained of its hurting his eyes.

I sat between them, at my dear girl's side, and felt very melancholy
listening to her sweet voice. I think Richard did too; I think he
darkened the room for that reason. She had been singing some time,
rising between whiles to bend over him and speak to him, when Mr
Woodcourt came in. Then he sat down by Richard and half playfully,
half earnestly, quite naturally and easily, found out how he felt and
where he had been all day. Presently he proposed to accompany him
in a short walk on one of the bridges, as it was a moonlight airy night;
and Richard readily consenting, they went out together.

They left my dear girl still sitting at the piano and me still sitting
beside her. When they were gone out, I drew my arm round her waist.
She put her left hand in mine (I was sitting on that side), but kept her
right upon the keys, going over and over them without striking any
note.

‘Esther, my dearest,’ she said, breaking silence, ‘Richard is never so
well and I am never so easy about him as when he is with Allan
Woodcourt. We have to thank you for that.’

I pointed out to my darling how this could scarcely be, because Mr
Woodcourt had come to her cousin John's house and had known us
all there, and because he had always liked Richard, and Richard had
always liked him, and--and so forth.

‘All true,’ said Ada, ‘but that he is such a devoted friend to us we owe
to you.’

I thought it best to let my dear girl have her way and to say no more
about it. So I said as much. I said it lightly, because I felt her
trembling.

‘Esther, my dearest, I want to be a good wife, a very, very good wife
indeed. You shall teach me.’

I teach! I said no more, for I noticed the hand that was fluttering over
the keys, and I knew that it was not I who ought to speak, that it was
she who had something to say to me.

‘When I married Richard I was not insensible to what was before him.
I had been perfectly happy for a long time with you, and I had never
known any trouble or anxiety, so loved and cared for, but I
understood the danger he was in, dear Esther.’

T know, I know, my darling.’

‘When we were married I had some little hope that I might be able to
convince him of his mistake, that he might come to regard it in a new
way as my husband and not pursue it all the more desperately for my
sake--as he does. But if I had not had that hope, I would have married
him just the same, Esther. Just the same!’
In the momentary firmness of the hand that was never still--a
firmness inspired by the utterance of these last words, and dying
away with them--I saw the confirmation of her earnest tones.

‘You are not to think, my dearest Esther, that I fail to see what you
see and fear what you fear. No one can understand him better than I
do. The greatest wisdom that ever lived in the world could scarcely
know Richard better than my love does.’

She spoke so modestly and softly and her trembling hand expressed
such agitation as it moved to and fro upon the silent notes! My dear,
dear girl!

T see him at his worst every day. I watch him in his sleep. I know
every change of his face. But when I married Richard I was quite
determined, Esther, if heaven would help me, never to show him that I
grieved for what he did and so to make him more unhappy. I want
him, when he comes home, to find no trouble in my face. I want him,
when he looks at me, to see what he loved in me. I married him to do
this, and this supports me.’

I felt her trembling more. I waited for what was yet to come, and I now
thought I began to know what it was.

‘And something else supports me, Esther.’

She stopped a minute. Stopped speaking only; her hand was still in
motion.

T look forward a little while, and I don't know what great aid may
come to me. When Richard turns his eyes upon me then, there may be
something lying on my breast more eloquent than I have been, with
greater power than mine to show him his true course and win him
back.’

Her hand stopped now. She clasped me in her arms, and I clasped her
in mine.

Tf that little creature should fail too, Esther, I still look forward. I look
forward a long while, through years and years, and think that then,
when I am growing old, or when I am dead perhaps, a beautiful
woman, his daughter, happily married, may be proud of him and a
blessing to him. Or that a generous brave man, as handsome as he
used to be, as hopeful, and far more happy, may walk in the sunshine
with him, honouring his grey head and saying to himself, 'I thank God
this is my father! Ruined by a fatal inheritance, and restored through
me!"
Oh, my sweet girl, what a heart was that which beat so fast against
me!

These hopes uphold me, my dear Esther, and I know they will.
Though sometimes even they depart from me before a dread that
arises when I look at Richard.’

I tried to cheer my darling, and asked her what it was. Sobbing and
weeping, she replied, ‘That he may not live to see his child.’
CHAPTER LXI - A Discovery

The days when I frequented that miserable corner which my dear girl
brightened can never fade in my remembrance. I never see it, and I
never wish to see it now; I have been there only once since, but in my
memory there is a mournful glory shining on the place which will
shine for ever.

Not a day passed without my going there, of course. At first I found Mr
Skimpole there, on two or three occasions, idly playing the piano and
talking in his usual vivacious strain. Now, besides my very much
mistrusting the probability of his being there without making Richard
poorer, I felt as if there were something in his careless gaiety too
inconsistent with what I knew of the depths of Ada's life. I clearly
perceived, too, that Ada shared my feelings. I therefore resolved, after
much thinking of it, to make a private visit to Mr Skimpole and try
delicately to explain myself. My dear girl was the great consideration
that made me bold.

I set off one morning, accompanied by Charley, for Somers Town. As I
approached the house, I was strongly inclined to turn back, for I felt
what a desperate attempt it was to make an impression on Mr
Skimpole and how extremely likely it was that he would signally defeat
me. However, I thought that being there, I would go through with it. I
knocked with a trembling hand at Mr Skimpole's door-- literally with a
hand, for the knocker was gone--and after a long parley gained
admission from an Irishwoman, who was in the area when I knocked,
breaking up the lid of a water-butt with a poker to light the fire with.

Mr Skimpole, lying on the sofa in his room, playing the flute a little,
was enchanted to see me. Now, who should receive me, he asked. Who
would I prefer for mistress of the ceremonies? Would I have his
Comedy daughter, his Beauty daughter, or his Sentiment daughter?
Or would I have all the daughters at once in a perfect nosegay?

I replied, half defeated already, that I wished to speak to himself only
if he would give me leave.

‘My dear Miss Summerson, most joyfully! Of course,’ he said, bringing
his chair nearer mine and breaking into his fascinating smile, ‘of
course it's not business. Then it's pleasure!’

I said it certainly was not business that I came upon, but it was not
quite a pleasant matter.

Then, my dear Miss Summerson,’ said he with the frankest gaiety,
‘don't allude to it. Why should you allude to anything that is NOT a
pleasant matter? I never do. And you are a much pleasanter creature,
in every point of view, than I. You are perfectly pleasant; I am
imperfectly pleasant; then, if I never allude to an unpleasant matter,
how much less should you! So that's disposed of, and we will talk of
something else.’

Although I was embarrassed, I took courage to intimate that I still
wished to pursue the subject.

T should think it a mistake,’ said Mr Skimpole with his airy laugh, ‘if I
thought Miss Summerson capable of making one. But I don't!’

‘Mr Skimpole,’ said I, raising my eyes to his, I have so often heard you
say that you are unacquainted with the common affairs of life--’

‘Meaning our three banking-house friends, L, S, and who's the junior
partner? D?’ said Mr Skimpole, brightly. ‘Not an idea of them!’

‘-That perhaps,’ I went on, ‘you will excuse my boldness on that
account. I think you ought most seriously to know that Richard is
poorer than he was.’

‘Dear me!’ said Mr Skimpole. ‘So am I, they tell me.’
‘And in very embarrassed circumstances.’

‘Parallel case, exactly!’ said Mr Skimpole with a _ delighted
countenance.

‘This at present naturally causes Ada much secret anxiety, and as I
think she is less anxious when no claims are made upon her by
visitors, and as Richard has one uneasiness always heavy on his
mind, it has occurred to me to take the liberty of saying that--if you
would--not--’

I was coming to the point with great difficulty when he took me by
both hands and with a radiant face and in the liveliest way anticipated
it.

‘Not go there? Certainly not, my dear Miss Summerson, most
assuredly not. Why SHOULD I go there? When I go anywhere, I go for
pleasure. I don't go anywhere for pain, because I was made for
pleasure. Pain comes to ME when it wants me. Now, I have had very
little pleasure at our dear Richard's lately, and your practical sagacity
demonstrates why. Our young friends, losing the youthful poetry
which was once so captivating in them, begin to think, 'This is a man
who wants pounds.' So I am; I always want pounds; not for myself,
but because tradespeople always want them of me. Next, our young
friends begin to think, becoming mercenary, ‘This is the man who
HAD pounds, who borrowed them,’ which I did. I always borrow
pounds. So our young friends, reduced to prose (which is much to be
regretted), degenerate in their power of imparting pleasure to me. Why
should I go to see them, therefore? Absurd!’

Through the beaming smile with which he regarded me as he
reasoned thus, there now broke forth a look of disinterested
benevolence quite astonishing.

‘Besides,’ he said, pursuing his argument in his tone of light- hearted
conviction, ‘if I don't go anywhere for pain--which would be a
perversion of the intention of my being, and a monstrous thing to do--
why should I go anywhere to be the cause of pain? If I went to see our
young friends in their present ill-regulated state of mind, I should give
them pain. The associations with me would be disagreeable. They
might say, ‘This is the man who had pounds and who can't pay
pounds,’ which I can't, of course; nothing could be more out of the
question! Then kindness requires that I shouldn't go near them--and I
won't.’

He finished by genially kissing my hand and thanking me. Nothing
but Miss Summerson's fine tact, he said, would have found this out
for him.

I was much disconcerted, but I reflected that if the main point were
gained, it mattered little how strangely he perverted everything leading
to it. I had determined to mention something else, however, and I
thought I was not to be put off in that.

‘Mr Skimpole,’ said I, I must take the liberty of saying before I
conclude my visit that I was much surprised to learn, on the best
authority, some little time ago, that you knew with whom that poor
boy left Bleak House and that you accepted a present on that
occasion. I have not mentioned it to my guardian, for I fear it would
hurt him unnecessarily; but I may say to you that I was much
surprised.’

‘No? Really surprised, my dear Miss Summerson?’ he returned
inquiringly, raising his pleasant eyebrows.

‘Greatly surprised.’
He thought about it for a little while with a highly agreeable and
whimsical expression of face, then quite gave it up and said in his

most engaging manner, ‘You know what a child I am. Why surprised?’

I was reluctant to enter minutely into that question, but as he begged
I would, for he was really curious to know, I gave him to understand
in the gentlest words I could use that his conduct seemed to involve a
disregard of several moral obligations. He was much amused and
interested when he heard this and said, ‘No, really?’ with ingenuous
simplicity.

‘YYou know I don't intend to be responsible. I never could do it.
Responsibility is a thing that has always been above me--or below me,’
said Mr Skimpole. IT don't even know which; but as I understand the
way in which my dear Miss Summerson (always remarkable for her
practical good sense and clearness) puts this case, I should imagine it
was chiefly a question of money, do you know?’

I incautiously gave a qualified assent to this.

‘Ah! Then you see,’ said Mr Skimpole, shaking his head, I am
hopeless of understanding it.’

I suggested, as I rose to go, that it was not right to betray my
guardian's confidence for a bribe.

‘My dear Miss Summerson,’ he returned with a candid hilarity that
was all his own, ‘1 can't be bribed.’

‘Not by Mr Bucket?’ said I.

‘No,’ said he. ‘Not by anybody. I don't attach any value to money. I
don't care about it, I don't know about it, I don't want it, I don't keep
it--it goes away from me directly. How can I be bribed?’

I showed that I was of a different opinion, though I had not the
capacity for arguing the question.

‘On the contrary,’ said Mr Skimpole, IT am exactly the man to be
placed in a superior position in such a case as that. I am above the
rest of mankind in such a case as that. I can act with philosophy in
such a case as that. I am not warped by prejudices, as an Italian baby
is by bandages. I am as free as the air. I feel myself as far above
suspicion as Caesar's wife.’

Anything to equal the lightness of his manner and the playful
impartiality with which he seemed to convince himself, as he tossed
the matter about like a ball of feathers, was surely never seen in
anybody else!

‘Observe the case, my dear Miss Summerson. Here is a boy received
into the house and put to bed in a state that I strongly object to. The
boy being in bed, a man arrives--like the house that Jack built. Here
is the man who demands the boy who is received into the house and
put to bed in a state that I strongly object to. Here is a bank-note
produced by the man who demands the boy who is received into the
house and put to bed in a state that I strongly object to. Here is the
Skimpole who accepts the bank-note produced by the man who
demands the boy who is received into the house and put to bed ina
state that I strongly object to. Those are the facts. Very well. Should
the Skimpole have refused the note? WHY should the Skimpole have
refused the note? Skimpole protests to Bucket, 'What's this for? I don't
understand it, it is of no use to me, take it away.' Bucket still entreats
Skimpole to accept it. Are there reasons why Skimpole, not being
warped by prejudices, should accept itP Yes. Skimpole perceives them.
What are they? Skimpole reasons with himself, this is a tamed lynx,
an active police-officer, an intelligent man, a person of a peculiarly
directed energy and great subtlety both of conception and execution,
who discovers our friends and enemies for us when they run away,
recovers our property for us when we are robbed, avenges us
comfortably when we are murdered. This active police-officer and
intelligent man has acquired, in the exercise of his art, a strong faith
in money; he finds it very useful to him, and he makes it very useful
to society. Shall I shake that faith in Bucket because I want it myself;
shall I deliberately blunt one of Bucket's weapons; shall I positively
paralyse Bucket in his next detective operation? And again. If it is
blameable in Skimpole to take the note, it is blameable in Bucket to
offer the note--much more blameable in Bucket, because he is the
knowing man. Now, Skimpole wishes to think well of Bucket;
Skimpole deems it essential, in its little place, to the general cohesion
of things, that he SHOULD think well of Bucket. The state expressly
asks him to trust to Bucket. And he does. And that's all he does!’

I had nothing to offer in reply to this exposition and therefore took my
leave. Mr Skimpole, however, who was in excellent spirits, would not
hear of my returning home attended only by ‘Little Coavinses,’ and
accompanied me himself. He entertained me on the way with a variety
of delightful conversation and assured me, at parting, that he should
never forget the fine tact with which I had found that out for him
about our young friends.

As it so happened that I never saw Mr Skimpole again, I may at once
finish what I know of his history. A coolness arose between him and
my guardian, based principally on the foregoing grounds and on his
having heartlessly disregarded my guardian's entreaties (as we
afterwards learned from Ada) in reference to Richard. His being
heavily in my guardian's debt had nothing to do with their separation.
He died some five years afterwards and left a diary behind him, with
letters and other materials towards his life, which was published and
which showed him to have been the victim of a combination on the
part of mankind against an amiable child. It was considered very
pleasant reading, but I never read more of it myself than the sentence
on which I chanced to light on opening the book. It was this:
Jarndyce, in common with most other men I have known, is the
incarnation of selfishness.’

And now I come to a part of my story touching myself very nearly
indeed, and for which I was quite unprepared when the circumstance
occurred. Whatever little lingerings may have now and then revived in
my mind associated with my poor old face had only revived as
belonging to a part of my life that was gone--gone like my infancy or
my childhood. I have suppressed none of my many weaknesses on
that subject, but have written them as faithfully as my memory has
recalled them. And I hope to do, and mean to do, the same down to
the last words of these pages, which I see now not so very far before
me.

The months were gliding away, and my dear girl, sustained by the
hopes she had confided in me, was the same beautiful star in the
miserable corner. Richard, more worn and haggard, haunted the court
day after day, listlessly sat there the whole day long when he knew
there was no remote chance of the suit being mentioned, and became
one of the stock sights of the place. I wonder whether any of the
gentlemen remembered him as he was when he first went there.

So completely was he absorbed in his fixed idea that he used to avow
in his cheerful moments that he should never have breathed the fresh
air now ‘but for Woodcourt.’ It was only Mr Woodcourt who could
occasionally divert his attention for a few hours at a time and rouse
him, even when he sunk into a lethargy of mind and body that
alarmed us greatly, and the returns of which became more frequent as
the months went on. My dear girl was right in saying that he only
pursued his errors the more desperately for her sake. I have no doubt
that his desire to retrieve what he had lost was rendered the more
intense by his grief for his young wife, and became like the madness of
a gamester.

I was there, as I have mentioned, at all hours. When I was there at
night, I generally went home with Charley in a coach; sometimes my
guardian would meet me in the neighbourhood, and we would walk
home together. One evening he had arranged to meet me at eight
o'clock. I could not leave, as I usually did, quite punctually at the
time, for I was working for my dear girl and had a few stitches more to
do to finish what I was about; but it was within a few minutes of the
hour when I bundled up my little work-basket, gave my darling my
last kiss for the night, and hurried downstairs. Mr Woodcourt went
with me, as it was dusk.

When we came to the usual place of meeting--it was close by, and Mr
Woodcourt had often accompanied me before--my guardian was not
there. We waited half an hour, walking up and down, but there were
no signs of him. We agreed that he was either prevented from coming
or that he had come and gone away, and Mr Woodcourt proposed to
walk home with me.

It was the first walk we had ever taken together, except that very short
one to the usual place of meeting. We spoke of Richard and Ada the
whole way. I did not thank him in words for what he had done--my
appreciation of it had risen above all words then--but I hoped he
might not be without some understanding of what I felt so strongly.

Arriving at home and going upstairs, we found that my guardian was
out and that Mrs Woodcourt was out too. We were in the very same
room into which I had brought my blushing girl when her youthful
lover, now her so altered husband, was the choice of her young heart,
the very same room from which my guardian and I had watched them
going away through the sunlight in the fresh bloom of their hope and
promise.

We were standing by the opened window looking down into the street
when Mr Woodcourt spoke to me. I learned in a moment that he loved
me. I learned in a moment that my scarred face was all unchanged to
him. I learned in a moment that what I had thought was pity and
compassion was devoted, generous, faithful love. Oh, too late to know
it now, too late, too late. That was the first ungrateful thought I had.
Too late.

‘When I returned,’ he told me, ‘when I came back, no richer than when
I went away, and found you newly risen from a sick bed, yet so
inspired by sweet consideration for others and so free from a selfish
thought--’

‘Oh, Mr Woodcourt, forbear, forbear!’ I entreated him. I do not deserve
your high praise. I had many selfish thoughts at that time, many!’

‘Heaven knows, beloved of my life,’ said he, ‘that my praise is not a
lover's praise, but the truth. You do not know what all around you see
in Esther Summerson, how many hearts she touches and awakens,
what sacred admiration and what love she wins.’

‘Oh, Mr Woodcourt,’ cried I, ‘it is a great thing to win love, it is a great
thing to win love! I am proud of it, and honoured by it; and the
hearing of it causes me to shed these tears of mingled joy and sorrow-
-joy that I have won it, sorrow that I have not deserved it better; but I
am not free to think of yours.’

I said it with a stronger heart, for when he praised me thus and when
I heard his voice thrill with his belief that what he said was true, I
aspired to be more worthy of it. It was not too late for that. Although I
closed this unforeseen page in my life to-night, I could be worthier of it
all through my life. And it was a comfort to me, and an impulse to me,
and I felt a dignity rise up within me that was derived from him when I
thought so.

He broke the silence.

T should poorly show the trust that I have in the dear one who will
evermore be as dear to me as now’--and the deep earnestness with
which he said it at once strengthened me and made me weep-- if,
after her assurance that she is not free to think of my love, I urged it.
Dear Esther, let me only tell you that the fond idea of you which I took
abroad was exalted to the heavens when I came home. I have always
hoped, in the first hour when I seemed to stand in any ray of good
fortune, to tell you this. I have always feared that I should tell it you in
vain. My hopes and fears are both fulfilled to-night. I distress you. I
have said enough.’

Something seemed to pass into my place that was like the angel he
thought me, and I felt so sorrowful for the loss he had sustained! I
wished to help him in his trouble, as I had wished to do when he
showed that first commiseration for me.

‘Dear Mr Woodcourt,’ said I, ‘before we part to-night, something is left
for me to say. I never could say it as I wish--I never shall--but--’

I had to think again of being more deserving of his love and his
affliction before I could go on.

“-I am deeply sensible of your generosity, and I shall treasure its
remembrance to my dying hour. I know full well how changed I am, I
know you are not unacquainted with my history, and I know what a
noble love that is which is so faithful. What you have said to me could
have affected me so much from no other lips, for there are none that
could give it such a value to me. It shall not be lost. It shall make me
better.’

He covered his eyes with his hand and turned away his head. How
could I ever be worthy of those tears?

Tf, in the unchanged intercourse we shall have together--in tending
Richard and Ada, and I hope in many happier scenes of life --you ever
find anything in me which you can honestly think is better than it
used to be, believe that it will have sprung up from to-night and that I
shall owe it to you. And never believe, dear dear Mr Woodcourt, never
believe that I forget this night or that while my heart beats it can be
insensible to the pride and joy of having been beloved by you.’
He took my hand and kissed it. He was like himself again, and I felt
still more encouraged.

T am induced by what you said just now,’ said I, ‘to hope that you
have succeeded in your endeavour.’

T have,’ he answered. ‘With such help from Mr Jarndyce as you who
know him so well can imagine him to have rendered me, I have
succeeded.’

‘Heaven bless him for it,’ said I, giving him my hand; ‘and heaven
bless you in all you do!’

T shall do it better for the wish,’ he answered; ‘it will make me enter
on these new duties as on another sacred trust from you.’

‘Ah! Richard!’ I exclaimed involuntarily, ‘What will he do when you are
gone!’

T am not required to go yet; I would not desert him, dear Miss
Summerson, even if I were.’

One other thing I felt it needful to touch upon before he left me. I
knew that I should not be worthier of the love I could not take if I
reserved it.

‘Mr Woodcourt,’ said I, ‘you will be glad to know from my lips before I
say good night that in the future, which is clear and bright before me,
Iam most happy, most fortunate, have nothing to regret or desire.’

It was indeed a glad hearing to him, he replied.

‘From my childhood I have been,’ said I, ‘the object of the untiring
goodness of the best of human beings, to whom I am so bound by
every tie of attachment, gratitude, and love, that nothing I could do in
the compass of a life could express the feelings of a single day.’

T share those feelings,’ he returned. ‘You speak of Mr Jarndyce.’

‘You know his virtues well,’ said I, ‘but few can know the greatness of
his character as I know it. All its highest and best qualities have been
revealed to me in nothing more brightly than in the shaping out of
that future in which I am so happy. And if your highest homage and
respect had not been his already--which I know they are--they would
have been his, I think, on this assurance and in the feeling it would
have awakened in you towards him for my sake.’
He fervently replied that indeed indeed they would have been. I gave
him my hand again.

‘Good night,’ I said, ‘Good-bye.’

The first until we meet to-morrow, the second as a farewell to this
theme between us for ever.’

Yes.’
‘Good night; good-bye.’

He left me, and I stood at the dark window watching the street. His
love, in all its constancy and generosity, had come so suddenly upon
me that he had not left me a minute when my fortitude gave way
again and the street was blotted out by my rushing tears.

But they were not tears of regret and sorrow. No. He had called me the
beloved of his life and had said I would be evermore as dear to him as
I was then, and I felt as if my heart would not hold the triumph of
having heard those words. My first wild thought had died away. It was
not too late to hear them, for it was not too late to be animated by
them to be good, true, grateful, and contented. How easy my path,
how much easier than his!
CHAPTER LXII - Another Discovery

I had not the courage to see any one that night. I had not even the
courage to see myself, for I was afraid that my tears might a little
reproach me. I went up to my room in the dark, and prayed in the
dark, and lay down in the dark to sleep. I had no need of any light to
read my guardian's letter by, for I knew it by heart. I took it from the
place where I kept it, and repeated its contents by its own clear light
of integrity and love, and went to sleep with it on my pillow.

I was up very early in the morning and called Charley to come for a
walk. We bought flowers for the breakfast-table, and came back and
arranged them, and were as busy as possible. We were so early that I
had a good time still for Charley's lesson before breakfast; Charley
(who was not in the least improved in the old defective article of
grammar) came through it with great applause; and we were
altogether very notable. When my guardian appeared he said, ‘Why,
little woman, you look fresher than your flowers!’ And Mrs Woodcourt
repeated and translated a passage from the Mewlinnwillinwodd
expressive of my being like a mountain with the sun upon it.

This was all so pleasant that I hope it made me still more like the
mountain than I had been before. After breakfast I waited my
opportunity and peeped about a little until I saw my guardian in his
own room--the room of last night--by himself. Then I made an excuse
to go in with my housekeeping keys, shutting the door after me.

‘Well, Dame Durden?’ said my guardian; the post had brought him
several letters, and he was writing. ‘You want money?’

‘No, indeed, I have plenty in hand.’ ‘There never was such a Dame
Durden,’ said my guardian, ‘for making money last.’

He had laid down his pen and leaned back in his chair looking at me.
I have often spoken of his bright face, but I thought I had never seen it
look so bright and good. There was a high happiness upon it which
made me think, ‘He has been doing some great kindness this
morning.’

‘There never was,’ said my guardian, musing as he smiled upon me,
‘such a Dame Durden for making money last.’

He had never yet altered his old manner. I loved it and him so much
that when I now went up to him and took my usual chair, which was
always put at his side--for sometimes I read to him, and sometimes I
talked to him, and sometimes I silently worked by him-- I hardly liked
to disturb it by laying my hand on his breast. But I found I did not
disturb it at all.
‘Dear guardian,’ said I, ‘I want to speak to you. Have I been remiss in
anything?’

‘Remiss in anything, my dear!’

‘Have I not been what I have meant to be since--I brought the answer
to your letter, guardian?’

‘You have been everything I could desire, my love.’

T am very glad indeed to hear that,’ I returned. ‘You know, you said to
me, was this the mistress of Bleak House. And I said, yes.’

Yes,’ said my guardian, nodding his head. He had put his arm about
me as if there were something to protect me from and looked in my
face, smiling.

‘Since then,’ said I, ‘we have never spoken on the subject except once.’

‘And then I said Bleak House was thinning fast; and so it was, my
dear.’

‘And I said,’ I timidly reminded him, ‘but its mistress remained.’

He still held me in the same protecting manner and with the same
bright goodness in his face.

‘Dear guardian,’ said I, I know how you have felt all that has
happened, and how considerate you have been. As so much time has
passed, and as you spoke only this morning of my being so well again,
perhaps you expect me to renew the subject. Perhaps I ought to do so.
I will be the mistress of Bleak House when you please.’

‘See,’ he returned gaily, ‘what a sympathy there must be between us! I
have had nothing else, poor Rick excepted--it's a large exception--in
my mind. When you came in, I was full of it. When shall we give Bleak
House its mistress, little woman?’

‘When you please.’

‘Next month?’

‘Next month, dear guardian.’

‘The day on which I take the happiest and best step of my life--the day
on which I shall be a man more exulting and more enviable than any

other man in the world--the day on which I give Bleak House its little
mistress--shall be next month then,’ said my guardian.
I put my arms round his neck and kissed him just as I had done on
the day when I brought my answer.

A servant came to the door to announce Mr Bucket, which was quite
unnecessary, for Mr Bucket was already looking in over the servant's
shoulder. ‘Mr Jarndyce and Miss Summerson,’ said he, rather out of
breath, ‘with all apologies for intruding, WILL you allow me to order
up a person that's on the stairs and that objects to being left there in
case of becoming the subject of observations in his absence? Thank
you. Be so good as chair that there member in this direction, will
you?’ said Mr Bucket, beckoning over the banisters.

This singular request produced an old man in a black skull-cap,
unable to walk, who was carried up by a couple of bearers and
deposited in the room near the door. Mr Bucket immediately got rid of
the bearers, mysteriously shut the door, and bolted it.

‘Now you see, Mr Jarndyce,’ he then began, putting down his hat and
opening his subject with a flourish of his well-remembered finger, ‘you
know me, and Miss Summerson knows me. This gentleman likewise
knows me, and his name is Smallweed. The discounting line is his line
principally, and he's what you may call a dealer in bills. That's about
what YOU are, you know, ain't you?’ said Mr Bucket, stopping a little
to address the gentleman in question, who was exceedingly suspicious
of him.

He seemed about to dispute this designation of himself when he was
seized with a violent fit of coughing.

‘Now, moral, you know!’ said Mr Bucket, improving the accident.
‘Don't you contradict when there ain't no occasion, and you won't be
took in that way. Now, Mr Jarndyce, I address myself to you. I've been
negotiating with this gentleman on behalf of Sir Leicester Dedlock,
Baronet, and one way and another I've been in and out and about his
premises a deal. His premises are the premises formerly occupied by
Krook, marine store dealer--a relation of this gentleman's that you
saw in his lifetime if I don't mistake?’

My guardian replied, ‘Yes.’

‘Well! You are to understand,’ said Mr Bucket, ‘that this gentleman he
come into Krook's property, and a good deal of magpie property there
was. Vast lots of waste-paper among the rest. Lord bless you, of no
use to nobody!’

The cunning of Mr Bucket's eye and the masterly manner in which he
contrived, without a look or a word against which his watchful auditor
could protest, to let us know that he stated the case according to
previous agreement and could say much more of Mr Smallweed if he
thought it advisable, deprived us of any merit in quite understanding
him. His difficulty was increased by Mr Smallweed's being deaf as well
as suspicious and watching his face with the closest attention.

‘Among them odd heaps of old papers, this gentleman, when he comes
into the property, naturally begins to rummage, don't you see?’ said
Mr Bucket.

‘To which? Say that again,’ cried Mr Smallweed in a shrill, sharp voice.

‘To rummage,’ repeated Mr Bucket. ‘Being a prudent man and
accustomed to take care of your own affairs, you begin to rummage
among the papers as you have come into; don't you?’

‘Of course I do,’ cried Mr Smallweed.

‘Of course you do,’ said Mr Bucket conversationally, ‘and much to
blame you would be if you didn't. And so you chance to find, you
know,’ Mr Bucket went on, stooping over him with an air of cheerful
raillery which Mr Smallweed by no means reciprocated, ‘and so you
chance to find, you know, a paper with the signature of Jarndyce to it.
Don't you?’

Mr Smallweed glanced with a troubled eye at us and grudgingly
nodded assent. ‘And coming to look at that paper at your full leisure
and convenience--all in good time, for you're not curious to read it,
and why should you be?--what do you find it to be but a will, you see.
That's the drollery of it,’ said Mr Bucket with the same lively air of
recalling a joke for the enjoyment of Mr Smallweed, who still had the
same crest-fallen appearance of not enjoying it at all; ‘what do you
find it to be but a will?’

T don't know that it's good as a will or as anything else,’ snarled Mr
Smallweed.

Mr Bucket eyed the old man for a moment--he had slipped and
shrunk down in his chair into a mere bundle--as if he were much
disposed to pounce upon him; nevertheless, he continued to bend over
him with the same agreeable air, keeping the corner of one of his eyes
upon us.

‘Notwithstanding which,’ said Mr Bucket, ‘you get a little doubtful and
uncomfortable in your mind about it, having a very tender mind of
your own.’

‘Eh? What do you say I have got of my own?’ asked Mr Smallweed with
his hand to his ear.
‘A very tender mind.’
‘Ho! Well, go on,’ said Mr Smallweed.

‘And as you've heard a good deal mentioned regarding a celebrated
Chancery will case of the same name, and as you know what a card
Krook was for buying all manner of old pieces of furniter, and books,
and papers, and what not, and never liking to part with 'em, and
always a-going to teach himself to read, you begin to think-- and you
never was more correct in your born days--'Ecod, if I don't look about
me, I may get into trouble regarding this will."‘

‘Now, mind how you put it, Bucket,’ cried the old man anxiously with
his hand at his ear. ‘Speak up; none of your brimstone tricks. Pick me
up; I want to hear better. Oh, Lord, I am shaken to bits!’

Mr Bucket had certainly picked him up at a dart. However, as soon as
he could be heard through Mr Smallweed's coughing and his vicious
ejaculations of ‘Oh, my bones! Oh, dear! I've no breath in my body! I'm
worse than the chattering, clattering, brimstone pig at home!’ Mr
Bucket proceeded in the same convivial manner as before.

‘So, as I happen to be in the habit of coming about your premises, you
take me into your confidence, don't you?’

I think it would be impossible to make an admission with more ill will
and a worse grace than Mr Smallweed displayed when he admitted
this, rendering it perfectly evident that Mr Bucket was the very last
person he would have thought of taking into his confidence if he could
by any possibility have kept him out of it.

‘And I go into the business with you--very pleasant we are over it; and
I confirm you in your well-founded fears that you will get yourself into
a most precious line if you don't come out with that there will,’ said
Mr Bucket emphatically; ‘and accordingly you arrange with me that it
shall be delivered up to this present Mr Jarndyce, on no conditions. If
it should prove to be valuable, you trusting yourself to him for your
reward; that's about where it is, ain't it?’

‘That's what was agreed,’ Mr Smallweed assented with the same bad
grace.

In consequence of which,’ said Mr Bucket, dismissing his agreeable
manner all at once and becoming strictly business-like, ‘you've got
that will upon your person at the present time, and the only thing that
remains for you to do is just to out with it!’
Having given us one glance out of the watching corner of his eye, and
having given his nose one triumphant rub with his forefinger, Mr
Bucket stood with his eyes fastened on his confidential friend and his
hand stretched forth ready to take the paper and present it to my
guardian. It was not produced without much reluctance and many
declarations on the part of Mr Smallweed that he was a poor
industrious man and that he left it to Mr Jarndyce's honour not to let
him lose by his honesty. Little by little he very slowly took from a
breast-pocket a stained, discoloured paper which was much singed
upon the outside and a little burnt at the edges, as if it had long ago
been thrown upon a fire and hastily snatched off again. Mr Bucket
lost no time in transferring this paper, with the dexterity of a conjuror,
from Mr Smallweed to Mr Jarndyce. As he gave it to my guardian, he
whispered behind his fingers, ‘Hadn't settled how to make their
market of it. Quarrelled and hinted about it. I laid out twenty pound
upon it. First the avaricious grandchildren split upon him on account
of their objections to his living so unreasonably long, and then they
split on one another. Lord! There ain't one of the family that wouldn't
sell the other for a pound or two, except the old lady--and she's only
out of it because she's too weak in her mind to drive a bargain.’

‘Mr Bucket,’ said my guardian aloud, ‘whatever the worth of this paper
may be to any one, my obligations are great to you; and if it be of any
worth, I hold myself bound to see Mr Smallweed remunerated
accordingly.’

‘Not according to your merits, you know,’ said Mr Bucket in friendly
explanation to Mr Smallweed. ‘Don't you be afraid of that. According
to its value.’

‘That is what I mean,’ said my guardian. ‘You may observe, Mr
Bucket, that I abstain from examining this paper myself. The plain
truth is, I have forsworn and abjured the whole business these many
years, and my soul is sick of it. But Miss Summerson and I will
immediately place the paper in the hands of my solicitor in the cause,
and its existence shall be made known without delay to all other
parties interested.’

‘Mr Jarndyce can't say fairer than that, you understand,’ observed Mr
Bucket to his fellow-visitor. ‘And it being now made clear to you that
nobody's a-going to be wronged--which must be a great relief to YOUR
mind--we may proceed with the ceremony of chairing you home again.’

He unbolted the door, called in the bearers, wished us good morning,
and with a look full of meaning and a crook of his finger at parting
went his way.
We went our way too, which was to Lincoln's Inn, as quickly as
possible. Mr Kenge was disengaged, and we found him at his table in
his dusty room with the inexpressive-looking books and the piles of
papers. Chairs having been placed for us by Mr Guppy, Mr Kenge
expressed the surprise and gratification he felt at the unusual sight of
Mr Jarndyce in his office. He turned over his double eye-glass as he
spoke and was more Conversation Kenge than ever.

T hope,’ said Mr Kenge, ‘that the genial influence of Miss Summerson,’
he bowed to me, ‘may have induced Mr Jarndyce,’ he bowed to him,
‘to forego some little of his animosity towards a cause and towards a
court which are--shall I say, which take their place in the stately vista
of the pillars of our profession?’

T am inclined to think,’ returned my guardian, ‘that Miss Summerson
has seen too much of the effects of the court and the cause to exert
any influence in their favour. Nevertheless, they are a part of the
occasion of my being here. Mr Kenge, before I lay this paper on your
desk and have done with it, let me tell you how it has come into my
hands.’

He did so shortly and distinctly.

Tt could not, sir,’ said Mr Kenge, ‘have been stated more plainly and to
the purpose if it had been a case at law.’

‘Did you ever know English law, or equity either, plain and to the
purpose?’ said my guardian.

‘Oh, fie!’ said Mr Kenge.

At first he had not seemed to attach much importance to the paper,
but when he saw it he appeared more interested, and when he had
opened and read a little of it through his eye-glass, he became
amazed. ‘Mr Jarndyce,’ he said, looking off it, ‘you have perused this?’

‘Not I! returned my guardian.

‘But, my dear sir,’ said Mr Kenge, ‘it is a will of later date than any in
the suit. It appears to be all in the testator's handwriting. It is duly
executed and attested. And even if intended to be cancelled, as might
possibly be supposed to be denoted by these marks of fire, it is NOT
cancelled. Here it is, a perfect instrument!’

‘Well!’ said my guardian. ‘What is that to me?’

‘Mr Guppy!’ cried Mr Kenge, raising his voice. I beg your pardon, Mr
Jarndyce.’
‘Sir.’

‘Mr Vholes of Symond's Inn. My compliments. Jarndyce and Jarndyce.
Glad to speak with him.’

Mr Guppy disappeared.

‘You ask me what is this to you, Mr Jarndyce. If you had perused this
document, you would have seen that it reduces your interest
considerably, though still leaving it a very handsome one, still leaving
it a very handsome one,’ said Mr Kenge, waving his hand persuasively
and blandly. ‘You would further have seen that the interests of Mr
Richard Carstone and of Miss Ada Clare, now Mrs Richard Carstone,
are very materially advanced by it.’

‘Kenge,’ said my guardian, ‘if all the flourishing wealth that the suit
brought into this vile court of Chancery could fall to my two young
cousins, I should be well contented. But do you ask ME to believe that
any good is to come of Jarndyce and Jarndyce?’

‘Oh, really, Mr Jarndyce! Prejudice, prejudice. My dear sir, this is a
very great country, a very great country. Its system of equity is a very
great system, a very great system. Really, really!’

My guardian said no more, and Mr Vholes arrived. He was modestly
impressed by Mr Kenge's professional eminence.

‘How do you do, Mr Vholes? Willl you be so good as to take a chair
here by me and look over this paper?’

Mr Vholes did as he was asked and seemed to read it every word. He
was not excited by it, but he was not excited by anything. When he
had well examined it, he retired with Mr Kenge into a window, and
shading his mouth with his black glove, spoke to him at some length.
I was not surprised to observe Mr Kenge inclined to dispute what he
said before he had said much, for I knew that no two people ever did
agree about anything in Jarndyce and Jarndyce. But he seemed to get
the better of Mr Kenge too in a conversation that sounded as if it were
almost composed of the words ‘Receiver- General,’ ‘Accountant-
General,’ ‘report,’ ‘estate,’ and ‘costs.’ When they had finished, they
came back to Mr Kenge's table and spoke aloud.

‘Well! But this is a very remarkable document, Mr Vholes,’ said Mr
Kenge.

Mr Vholes said, ‘Very much so.’

‘And a very important document, Mr Vholes,’ said Mr Kenge.
Again Mr Vholes said, ‘Very much so.’

‘And as you say, Mr Vholes, when the cause is in the paper next term,
this document will be an unexpected and interesting feature in it,’
said Mr Kenge, looking loftily at my guardian.

Mr Vholes was gratified, as a smaller practitioner striving to keep
respectable, to be confirmed in any opinion of his own by such an
authority.

‘And when,’ asked my guardian, rising after a pause, during which Mr
Kenge had rattled his money and Mr Vholes had picked his pimples,
‘when is next term?’

‘Next term, Mr Jarndyce, will be next month,’ said Mr Kenge. ‘Of
course we shall at once proceed to do what is necessary with this
document and to collect the necessary evidence concerning it; and of
course you will receive our usual notification of the cause being in the

paper.’
‘To which I shall pay, of course, my usual attention.’

‘Still bent, my dear sir,’ said Mr Kenge, showing us through the outer
office to the door, ‘still bent, even with your enlarged mind, on echoing
a popular prejudice? We are a prosperous community, Mr Jarndyce, a
very prosperous community. We are a great country, Mr Jarndyce, we
are a very great country. This is a great system, Mr Jarndyce, and
would you wish a great country to have a little system? Now, really,
really!’

He said this at the stair-head, gently moving his right hand as if it
were a Silver trowel with which to spread the cement of his words on
the structure of the system and consolidate it for a thousand ages.
CHAPTER LXIII - Steel and Iron

George's Shooting Gallery is to let, and the stock is sold off, and
George himself is at Chesney Wold attending on Sir Leicester in his
rides and riding very near his bridle-rein because of the uncertain
hand with which he guides his horse. But not to-day is George so
occupied. He is journeying to-day into the iron country farther north
to look about him.

As he comes into the iron country farther north, such fresh green
woods as those of Chesney Wold are left behind; and coal pits and
ashes, high chimneys and red bricks, blighted verdure, scorching
fires, and a heavy never-lightening cloud of smoke become the
features of the scenery. Among such objects rides the trooper, looking
about him and always looking for something he has come to find.

At last, on the black canal bridge of a busy town, with a clang of iron
in it, and more fires and more smoke than he has seen yet, the
trooper, swart with the dust of the coal roads, checks his horse and
asks a workman does he know the name of Rouncewell thereabouts.

‘Why, master,’ quoth the workman, ‘do I know my own name?’
“Tis so well known here, is it, comrade?’ asks the trooper.
‘Rouncewell's? Ah! You're right.’

‘And where might it be now?’ asks the trooper with a glance before
him.

‘The bank, the factory, or the house?’ the workman wants to know.

‘Hum! Rouncewell's is so great apparently,’ mutters the trooper,
stroking his chin, ‘that I have as good as half a mind to go back again.
Why, I don't know which I want. Should I find Mr Rouncewell at the
factory, do you think?’

‘Tain't easy to say where you'd find him--at this time of the day you
might find either him or his son there, if he's in town; but his
contracts take him away.’

And which is the factory? Why, he sees those chimneys--the tallest
ones! Yes, he sees THEM. Well! Let him keep his eye on those
chimneys, going on as straight as ever he can, and presently he'll see
‘em down a turning on the left, shut in by a great brick wall which
forms one side of the street. That's Rouncewell's.
The trooper thanks his informant and rides slowly on, looking about
him. He does not turn back, but puts up his horse (and is much
disposed to groom him too) at a public-house where some of
Rouncewell's hands are dining, as the ostler tells him. Some of
Rouncewell's hands have just knocked off for dinner-time and seem to
be invading the whole town. They are very sinewy and strong, are
Rouncewell's hands--a little sooty too.

He comes to a gateway in the brick wall, looks in, and sees a great
perplexity of iron lying about in every stage and in a vast variety of
shapes--in bars, in wedges, in sheets; in tanks, in boilers, in axles, in
wheels, in cogs, in cranks, in rails; twisted and wrenched into
eccentric and perverse forms as separate parts of machinery;
mountains of it broken up, and rusty in its age; distant furnaces of it
glowing and bubbling in its youth; bright fireworks of it showering
about under the blows of the steam-hammer; red-hot iron, white-hot
iron, cold-black iron; an iron taste, an iron smell, and a Babel of iron
sounds.

This is a place to make a man's head ache too!’ says the trooper,
looking about him for a counting-house. ‘Who comes here? This is
very like me before I was set up. This ought to be my nephew, if
likenesses run in families. Your servant, sir.’

‘Yours, sir. Are you looking for any one?’

‘Excuse me. Young Mr Rouncewell, I believe?’

Yes.’

T was looking for your father, sir. I wish to have a word with him.’

The young man, telling him he is fortunate in his choice of a time, for
his father is there, leads the way to the office where he is to be found.
‘Very like me before I was set up--devilish like me!’ thinks the trooper
as he follows. They come to a building in the yard with an office on an
upper floor. At sight of the gentleman in the office, Mr George turns
very red.

‘What name shall I say to my father?’ asks the young man.

George, full of the idea of iron, in desperation answers ‘Steel,’ and is
so presented. He is left alone with the gentleman in the office, who sits
at a table with account-books before him and some sheets of paper
blotted with hosts of figures and drawings of cunning shapes. It is a
bare office, with bare windows, looking on the iron view below.
Tumbled together on the table are some pieces of iron, purposely
broken to be tested at various periods of their service, in various
capacities. There is iron-dust on everything; and the smoke is seen
through the windows rolling heavily out of the tall chimneys to mingle
with the smoke from a vaporous Babylon of other chimneys.

T am at your service, Mr Steel,’ says the gentleman when his visitor
has taken a rusty chair.

‘Well, Mr Rouncewell,’ George replies, leaning forward with his left arm
on his knee and his hat in his hand, and very chary of meeting his
brother's eye, I am not without my expectations that in the present
visit I may prove to be more free than welcome. I have served as a
dragoon in my day, and a comrade of mine that I was once rather
partial to was, if I don't deceive myself, a brother of yours. I believe
you had a brother who gave his family some trouble, and ran away,
and never did any good but in keeping away?’

‘Are you quite sure,’ returns the ironmaster in an altered voice, ‘that
your name is Steel?’

The trooper falters and looks at him. His brother starts up, calls him
by his name, and grasps him by both hands.

‘You are too quick for me!’ cries the trooper with the tears springing
out of his eyes. ‘How do you do, my dear old fellow? I never could have
thought you would have been half so glad to see me as all this. How
do you do, my dear old fellow, how do you do!’

They shake hands and embrace each other over and over again, the
trooper still coupling his ‘How do you do, my dear old fellow!’ with his
protestation that he never thought his brother would have been half
so glad to see him as all this!

‘So far from it,’ he declares at the end of a full account of what has
preceded his arrival there, IT had very little idea of making myself
known. I thought if you took by any means forgivingly to my name I
might gradually get myself up to the point of writing a letter. But I
should not have been surprised, brother, if you had considered it
anything but welcome news to hear of me.’

‘We will show you at home what kind of news we think it, George,’
returns his brother. ‘This is a great day at home, and you could not
have arrived, you bronzed old soldier, on a better. I make an
agreement with my son Watt to-day that on this day twelvemonth he
shall marry as pretty and as good a girl as you have seen in all your
travels. She goes to Germany to-morrow with one of your nieces for a
little polishing up in her education. We make a feast of the event, and
you will be made the hero of it.’
Mr George is so entirely overcome at first by this prospect that he
resists the proposed honour with great earnestness. Being overborne,
however, by his brother and his nephew--concerning whom he renews
his protestations that he never could have thought they would have
been half so glad to see him--he is taken home to an elegant house in
all the arrangements of which there is to be observed a pleasant
mixture of the originally simple habits of the father and mother with
such as are suited to their altered station and the higher fortunes of
their children. Here Mr George is much dismayed by the graces and
accomplishments of his nieces that are and by the beauty of Rosa, his
niece that is to be, and by the affectionate salutations of these young
ladies, which he receives in a sort of dream. He is sorely taken aback,
too, by the dutiful behaviour of his nephew and has a woeful
consciousness upon him of being a scapegrace. However, there is
great rejoicing and a very hearty company and infinite enjoyment, and
Mr George comes bluff and martial through it all, and his pledge to be
present at the marriage and give away the bride is received with
universal favour. A whirling head has Mr George that night when he
lies down in the state-bed of his brother's house to think of all these
things and to see the images of his nieces (awful all the evening in
their floating muslins) waltzing, after the German manner, over his
counterpane.

The brothers are closeted next morning in the ironmaster's room,
where the elder is proceeding, in his clear sensible way, to show how
he thinks he may best dispose of George in his business, when George
squeezes his hand and stops him.

‘Brother, I thank you a million times for your more than brotherly
welcome, and a million times more to that for your more than
brotherly intentions. But my plans are made. Before I say a word as to
them, I wish to consult you upon one family point. How,’ says the
trooper, folding his arms and looking with indomitable firmness at his
brother, ‘how is my mother to be got to scratch me?’

T am not sure that I understand you, George,’ replies the ironmaster.

T say, brother, how is my mother to be got to scratch me? She must
be got to do it somehow.’

‘Scratch you out of her will, I think you mean?’

‘Of course I do. In short,’ says the trooper, folding his arms more
resolutely yet, ‘I mean--TO--scratch me!’

‘My dear George,’ returns his brother, ‘is it so indispensable that you
should undergo that process?’
‘Quite! Absolutely! I couldn't be guilty of the meanness of coming back
without it. I should never be safe not to be off again. I have not
sneaked home to rob your children, if not yourself, brother, of your
rights. I, who forfeited mine long ago! If I am to remain and hold up
my head, I must be scratched. Come. You are a man of celebrated
penetration and intelligence, and you can tell me how it's to be
brought about.’

T can tell you, George,’ replies the ironmaster deliberately, ‘how it is
not to be brought about, which I hope may answer the purpose as
well. Look at our mother, think of her, recall her emotion when she
recovered you. Do you believe there is a consideration in the world
that would induce her to take such a step against her favourite son?
Do you believe there is any chance of her consent, to balance against
the outrage it would be to her (loving dear old lady!) to propose it? If
you do, you are wrong. No, George! You must make up your mind to
remain UNscratched, I think.’ There is an amused smile on the
ironmaster's face as he watches his brother, who is pondering, deeply
disappointed. IT think you may manage almost as well as if the thing
were done, though.’

‘How, brother?’

‘Being bent upon it, you can dispose by will of anything you have the
misfortune to inherit in any way you like, you know.’

‘That's true!’ says the trooper, pondering again. Then he wistfully
asks, with his hand on his brother's, ‘Would you mind mentioning
that, brother, to your wife and family?’

Not at all.’

Thank you. You wouldn't object to say, perhaps, that although an
undoubted vagabond, I am a vagabond of the harum-scarum order,
and not of the mean sort?’

The ironmaster, repressing his amused smile, assents.

Thank you. Thank you. It's a weight off my mind,’ says the trooper
with a heave of his chest as he unfolds his arms and puts a hand on
each leg, ‘though I had set my heart on being scratched, too!’

The brothers are very like each other, sitting face to face; but a certain
massive simplicity and absence of usage in the ways of the world is all
on the trooper's side.

‘Well,’ he proceeds, throwing off his disappointment, ‘next and last,
those plans of mine. You have been so brotherly as to propose to me
to fall in here and take my place among the products of your
perseverance and sense. I thank you heartily. It's more than brotherly,
as I said before, and I thank you heartily for it,’ shaking him a long
time by the hand. ‘But the truth is, brother, I am a--I am a kind ofa
weed, and it's too late to plant me in a regular garden.’

‘My dear George,’ returns the elder, concentrating his strong steady
brow upon him and smiling confidently, leave that to me, and let me

try.’

George shakes his head. ‘You could do it, I have not a doubt, if
anybody could; but it's not to be done. Not to be done, sir! Whereas it
so falls out, on the other hand, that I am able to be of some trifle of
use to Sir Leicester Dedlock since his illness-- brought on by family
sorrows--and that he would rather have that help from our mother's
son than from anybody else.’

‘Well, my dear George,’ returns the other with a very slight shade
upon his open face, ‘if you prefer to serve in Sir Leicester Dedlock's
household brigade--’

‘There it is, brother,’ cries the trooper, checking him, with his hand
upon his knee again; ‘there it is! You don't take kindly to that idea; I
don't mind it. You are not used to being officered; I am. Everything
about you is in perfect order and discipline; everything about me
requires to be kept so. We are not accustomed to carry things with the
same hand or to look at 'em from the same point. I don't say much
about my garrison manners because I found myself pretty well at my
ease last night, and they wouldn't be noticed here, I dare say, once
and away. But I shall get on best at Chesney Wold, where there's more
room for a weed than there is here; and the dear old lady will be made
happy besides. Therefore I accept of Sir Leicester Dedlock's proposals.
When I come over next year to give away the bride, or whenever I
come, I shall have the sense to keep the household brigade in
ambuscade and not to manoeuvre it on your ground. I thank you
heartily again and am proud to think of the Rouncewells as they'll be
founded by you.’

‘You know yourself, George,’ says the elder brother, returning the grip
of his hand, ‘and perhaps you know me better than I know myself.
Take your way. So that we don't quite lose one another again, take
your way.’

‘No fear of that!’ returns the trooper. ‘Now, before I turn my horse's
head homewards, brother, I will ask you--if you'll be so good--to look
over a letter for me. I brought it with me to send from these parts, as
Chesney Wold might be a painful name just now to the person it's
written to. Iam not much accustomed to correspondence myself, and
I am particular respecting this present letter because I want it to be
both straightforward and delicate.’

Herewith he hands a letter, closely written in somewhat pale ink but
in a neat round hand, to the ironmaster, who reads as follows:

Miss Esther Summerson,

A communication having been made to me by Inspector Bucket of a
letter to myself being found among the papers of a certain person, I
take the liberty to make known to you that it was but a few lines of
instruction from abroad, when, where, and how to deliver an enclosed
letter to a young and beautiful lady, then unmarried, in England. I
duly observed the same.

I further take the liberty to make known to you that it was got from
me as a proof of handwriting only and that otherwise I would not have
given it up, as appearing to be the most harmless in my possession,
without being previously shot through the heart.

I further take the liberty to mention that if I could have supposed a
certain unfortunate gentleman to have been in existence, I never could
and never would have rested until I had discovered his retreat and
shared my last farthing with him, as my duty and my inclination
would have equally been. But he was (officially) reported drowned, and
assuredly went over the side of a transport- ship at night in an Irish
harbour within a few hours of her arrival from the West Indies, as I
have myself heard both from officers and men on board, and know to
have been (officially) confirmed.

I further take the liberty to state that in my humble quality as one of
the rank and file, I am, and shall ever continue to be, your thoroughly
devoted and admiring servant and that I esteem the qualities you
possess above all others far beyond the limits of the present dispatch.
I have the honour to be,

GEORGE

‘A little formal,’ observes the elder brother, refolding it with a puzzled
face.

‘But nothing that might not be sent to a pattern young lady?’ asks the
younger.

‘Nothing at all.’
Therefore it is sealed and deposited for posting among the iron
correspondence of the day. This done, Mr George takes a hearty
farewell of the family party and prepares to saddle and mount. His
brother, however, unwilling to part with him so soon, proposes to ride
with him in a light open carriage to the place where he will bait for the
night, and there remain with him until morning, a servant riding for
so much of the journey on the thoroughbred old grey from Chesney
Wold. The offer, being gladly accepted, is followed by a pleasant ride, a
pleasant dinner, and a pleasant breakfast, all in brotherly
communion. Then they once more shake hands long and heartily and
part, the ironmaster turning his face to the smoke and fires, and the
trooper to the green country. Early in the afternoon the subdued
sound of his heavy military trot is heard on the turf in the avenue as
he rides on with imaginary clank and jingle of accoutrements under
the old elm-trees.
CHAPTER LXIV - Esther's Narrative

Soon after I had that convertion with my guardian, he put a sealed
paper in my hand one morning and said, ‘This is for next month, my
dear.’ I found in it two hundred pounds.

I now began very quietly to make such preparations as I thought were
necessary. Regulating my purchases by my guardian's taste, which I
knew very well of course, I arranged my wardrobe to please him and
hoped I should be highly successful. I did it all so quietly because I
was not quite free from my old apprehension that Ada would be rather
sorry and because my guardian was so quiet himself. I had no doubt
that under all the circumstances we should be married in the most
private and simple manner. Perhaps I should only have to say to Ada,
‘Would you like to come and see me married to-morrow, my pet?’
Perhaps our wedding might even be as unpretending as her own, and
I might not find it necessary to say anything about it until it was over.
I thought that if I were to choose, I would like this best.

The only exception I made was Mrs Woodcourt. I told her that I was
going to be married to my guardian and that we had been engaged
some time. She highly approved. She could never do enough for me
and was remarkably softened now in comparison with what she had
been when we first knew her. There was no trouble she would not
have taken to have been of use to me, but I need hardly say that I only
allowed her to take as little as gratified her kindness without tasking
it.

Of course this was not a time to neglect my guardian, and of course it
was not a time for neglecting my darling. So I had plenty of
occupation, which I was glad of; and as to Charley, she was absolutely
not to be seen for needlework. To surround herself with great heaps of
it--baskets full and tables full--and do a little, and spend a great deal
of time in staring with her round eyes at what there was to do, and
persuade herself that she was going to do it, were Charley's great
dignities and delights.

Meanwhile, I must say, I could not agree with my guardian on the
subject of the will, and I had some sanguine hopes of Jarndyce and
Jarndyce. Which of us was right will soon appear, but I certainly did
encourage expectations. In Richard, the discovery gave occasion for a
burst of business and agitation that buoyed him up for a little time,
but he had lost the elasticity even of hope now and seemed to me to
retain only its feverish anxieties. From something my guardian said
one day when we were talking about this, I understood that my
marriage would not take place until after the term-time we had been
told to look forward to; and I thought the more, for that, how rejoiced I
should be if I could be married when Richard and Ada were a little
more prosperous.

The term was very near indeed when my guardian was called out of
town and went down into Yorkshire on Mr Woodcourt's business. He
had told me beforehand that his presence there would be necessary. I
had just come in one night from my dear girl's and was sitting in the
midst of all my new clothes, looking at them all around me and
thinking, when a letter from my guardian was brought to me. It asked
me to join him in the country and mentioned by what stage- coach my
place was taken and at what time in the morning I should have to
leave town. It added in a postscript that I would not be many hours
from Ada.

I expected few things less than a journey at that time, but I was ready
for it in half an hour and set off as appointed early next morning. I
travelled all day, wondering all day what I could be wanted for at such
a distance; now I thought it might be for this purpose, and now I
thought it might be for that purpose, but I was never, never, never
near the truth.

It was night when I came to my journey's end and found my guardian
waiting for me. This was a great relief, for towards evening I had
begun to fear (the more so as his letter was a very short one) that he
might be ill. However, there he was, as well as it was possible to be;
and when I saw his genial face again at its brightest and best, I said to
myself, he has been doing some other great kindness. Not that it
required much penetration to say that, because I knew that his being
there at all was an act of kindness.

Supper was ready at the hotel, and when we were alone at table he
said, ‘Full of curiosity, no doubt, little woman, to know why I have
brought you here?’

‘Well, guardian,’ said I, ‘without thinking myself a Fatima or you a
Blue Beard, I am a little curious about it.’

‘Then to ensure your night's rest, my love,’ he returned gaily, I won't
wait until to-morrow to tell you. I have very much wished to express to
Woodcourt, somehow, my sense of his humanity to poor unfortunate
Jo, his inestimable services to my young cousins, and his value to us
all. When it was decided that he should settle here, it came into my
head that I might ask his acceptance of some unpretending and
suitable little place to lay his own head in. I therefore caused such a
place to be looked out for, and such a place was found on very easy
terms, and I have been touching it up for him and making it
habitable. However, when I walked over it the day before yesterday
and it was reported ready, I found that I was not housekeeper enough
to know whether things were all as they ought to be. So I sent off for
the best little housekeeper that could possibly be got to come and give
me her advice and opinion. And here she is,’ said my guardian,
‘laughing and crying both together!’

Because he was so dear, so good, so admirable. I tried to tell him what
I thought of him, but I could not articulate a word.

Tut, tut!’ said my guardian. ‘You make too much of it, little woman.
Why, how you sob, Dame Durden, how you sob!’

Tt is with exquisite pleasure, guardian--with a heart full of thanks.’

‘Well, well,’ said he. IT am delighted that you approve. I thought you
would. I meant it as a pleasant surprise for the little mistress of Bleak
House.’

I kissed him and dried my eyes. I know now!’ said I. I have seen this
in your face a long while.’

‘No; have you really, my dear?’ said he. ‘What a Dame Durden it is to
read a face!’

He was so quaintly cheerful that I could not long be otherwise, and
was almost ashamed of having been otherwise at all. When I went to
bed, I cried. Iam bound to confess that I cried; but I hope it was with
pleasure, though I am not quite sure it was with pleasure. I repeated
every word of the letter twice over.

A most beautiful summer morning succeeded, and after breakfast we
went out arm in arm to see the house of which I was to give my
mighty housekeeping opinion. We entered a flower-garden by a gate in
a side wall, of which he had the key, and the first thing I saw was that
the beds and flowers were all laid out according to the manner of my
beds and flowers at home.

‘YYou see, my dear,’ observed my guardian, standing still with a
delighted face to watch my looks, ‘knowing there could be no better
plan, I borrowed yours.’

We went on by a pretty little orchard, where the cherries were nestling
among the green leaves and the shadows of the apple-trees were
sporting on the grass, to the house itself--a cottage, quite a rustic
cottage of doll's rooms; but such a lovely place, so tranquil and so
beautiful, with such a rich and smiling country spread around it; with
water sparkling away into the distance, here all overhung with
summer-growth, there turning a humming mill; at its nearest point
glancing through a meadow by the cheerful town, where cricket-
players were assembling in bright groups and a flag was flying from a
white tent that rippled in the sweet west wind. And still, as we went
through the pretty rooms, out at the little rustic verandah doors, and
underneath the tiny wooden colonnades garlanded with woodbine,
jasmine, and honey-suckle, I saw in the papering on the walls, in the
colours of the furniture, in the arrangement of all the pretty objects,
MY little tastes and fancies, MY little methods and inventions which
they used to laugh at while they praised them, my odd ways
everywhere.

I could not say enough in admiration of what was all so beautiful, but
one secret doubt arose in my mind when I saw this, I thought, oh,
would he be the happier for it! Would it not have been better for his
peace that I should not have been so brought before him? Because
although I was not what he thought me, still he loved me very dearly,
and it might remind him mournfully of what be believed he had lost. I
did not wish him to forget me--perhaps he might not have done so,
without these aids to his memory--but my way was easier than his,
and I could have reconciled myself even to that so that he had been
the happier for it.

‘And now, little woman,’ said my guardian, whom I had never seen so
proud and joyful as in showing me these things and watching my
appreciation of them, ‘now, last of all, for the name of this house.’

‘What is it called, dear guardian?’
‘My child,’ said he, ‘come and see,’

He took me to the porch, which he had hitherto avoided, and said,
pausing before we went out, ‘My dear child, don't you guess the
name?’

Nol!’ said I.

We went out of the porch and he showed me written over it, Bleak
House.

He led me to a seat among the leaves close by, and sitting down beside
me and taking my hand in his, spoke to me thus, “My darling girl, in
what there has been between us, I have, I hope, been really solicitous
for your happiness. When I wrote you the letter to which you brought
the answer,’ smiling as he referred to it, I had my own too much in
view; but I had yours too. Whether, under different circumstances, I
might ever have renewed the old dream I sometimes dreamed when
you were very young, of making you my wife one day, I need not ask
myself. I did renew it, and I wrote my letter, and you brought your
answer. You are following what I say, my child?’
I was cold, and I trembled violently, but not a word he uttered was
lost. As I sat looking fixedly at him and the sun's rays descended,
softly shining through the leaves upon his bare head, I felt as if the
brightness on him must be like the brightness of the angels.

‘Hear me, my love, but do not speak. It is for me to speak now. When
it was that I began to doubt whether what I had done would really
make you happy is no matter. Woodcourt came home, and I soon had
no doubt at all.’

I clasped him round the neck and hung my head upon his breast and
wept. ‘Lie lightly, confidently here, my child,’ said he, pressing me
gently to him. TI am your guardian and your father now. Rest
confidently here.’

Soothingly, like the gentle rustling of the leaves; and genially, like the
ripening weather; and radiantly and beneficently, like the sunshine,
he went on.

‘Understand me, my dear girl. I had no doubt of your being contented
and happy with me, being so dutiful and so devoted; but I saw with
whom you would be happier. That I penetrated his secret when Dame
Durden was blind to it is no wonder, for I knew the good that could
never change in her better far than she did. Well! I have long been in
Allan Woodcourt's confidence, although he was not, until yesterday, a
few hours before you came here, in mine. But I would not have my
Esther's bright example lost; I would not have a jot of my dear girl's
virtues unobserved and unhonoured; I would not have her admitted
on sufferance into the line of Morgan ap-Kerrig, no, not for the weight
in gold of all the mountains in Wales!’

He stopped to kiss me on the forehead, and I sobbed and wept afresh.
For I felt as if I could not bear the painful delight of his praise.

‘Hush, little woman! Don't cry; this is to be a day of joy. I have looked
forward to it,’ he said exultingly, for months on months! A few words
more, Dame Trot, and I have said my say. Determined not to throw
away one atom of my Esther's worth, I took Mrs Woodcourt into a
separate confidence. 'Now, madam,' said I, 'I clearly perceive--and
indeed I know, to boot--that your son loves my ward. I am further very
sure that my ward loves your son, but will sacrifice her love to a sense
of duty and affection, and will sacrifice it so completely, so entirely, so
religiously, that you should never suspect it though you watched her
night and day.' Then I told her all our story--ours--yours and mine.
'Now, madam,' said I, 'come you, knowing this, and live with us. Come
you, and see my child from hour to hour; set what you see against her
pedigree, which is this, and this'--for I scorned to mince it--'and tell
me what is the true legitimacy when you shall have quite made up
your mind on that subject.' Why, honour to her old Welsh blood, my
dear,’ cried my guardian with enthusiasm, T believe the heart it
animates beats no less warmly, no less admiringly, no less lovingly,
towards Dame Durden than my own!’

He tenderly raised my head, and as I clung to him, kissed me in his
old fatherly way again and again. What a light, now, on the protecting
manner I had thought about!

‘One more last word. When Allan Woodcourt spoke to you, my dear,
he spoke with my knowledge and consent--but I gave him no
encouragement, not I, for these surprises were my great reward, and I
was too miserly to part with a scrap of it. He was to come and tell me
all that passed, and he did. I have no more to say. My dearest, Allan
Woodcourt stood beside your father when he lay dead --stood beside
your mother. This is Bleak House. This day I give this house its little
mistress; and before God, it is the brightest day in all my life!’

He rose and raised me with him. We were no longer alone. My
husband--I have called him by that name full seven happy years now -
-stood at my side.

‘Allan,’ said my guardian, ‘take from me a willing gift, the best wife
that ever man had. What more can I say for you than that I know you
deserve her! Take with her the little home she brings you. You know
what she will make it, Allan; you know what she has made its
namesake. Let me share its felicity sometimes, and what do I
sacrifice? Nothing, nothing.’

He kissed me once again, and now the tears were in his eyes as he
said more softly, ‘Esther, my dearest, after so many years, there is a
kind of parting in this too. I know that my mistake has caused you
some distress. Forgive your old guardian, in restoring him to his old
place in your affections; and blot it out of your memory. Allan, take
my dear.’

He moved away from under the green roof of leaves, and stopping in
the sunlight outside and turning cheerfully towards us, said, 1 shall
be found about here somewhere. It's a west wind, little woman, due
west! Let no one thank me any more, for I am going to revert to my
bachelor habits, and if anybody disregards this warning, I'll run away
and never come back!’

What happiness was ours that day, what joy, what rest, what hope,
what gratitude, what bliss! We were to be married before the month
was out, but when we were to come and take possession of our own
house was to depend on Richard and Ada.
We all three went home together next day. As soon as we arrived in
town, Allan went straight to see Richard and to carry our joyful news
to him and my darling. Late as it was, I meant to go to her for a few
minutes before lying down to sleep, but I went home with my guardian
first to make his tea for him and to occupy the old chair by his side,
for I did not like to think of its being empty so soon.

When we came home we found that a young man had called three
times in the course of that one day to see me and that having been
told on the occasion of his third call that I was not expected to return
before ten o'clock at night, he had left word that he would call about
then. He had left his card three times. Mr Guppy.

As I naturally speculated on the object of these visits, and as I always
associated something ludicrous with the visitor, it fell out that in
laughing about Mr Guppy I told my guardian of his old proposal and
his subsequent retraction. ‘After that,’ said my guardian, ‘we will
certainly receive this hero.’ So instructions were given that Mr Guppy
should be shown in when he came again, and they were scarcely given
when he did come again.

He was embarrassed when he found my guardian with me, but
recovered himself and said, ‘How de do, sir?’

‘How do you do, sir?’ returned my guardian.

‘Thank you, sir, Iam tolerable,’ returned Mr Guppy. ‘Will you allow me
to introduce my mother, Mrs Guppy of the Old Street Road, and my
particular friend, Mr Weevle. That is to say, my friend has gone by the
name of Weevle, but his name is really and truly Jobling.’

My guardian begged them to be seated, and they all sat down.

Tony,’ said Mr Guppy to his friend after an awkward silence. ‘Will you
open the case?’

‘Do it yourself,’ returned the friend rather tartly.

‘Well, Mr Jarndyce, sir,’ Mr Guppy, after a moment's consideration,
began, to the great diversion of his mother, which she displayed by
nudging Mr Jobling with her elbow and winking at me in a most
remarkable manner, I had an idea that I should see Miss Summerson
by herself and was not quite prepared for your esteemed presence.
But Miss Summerson has mentioned to you, perhaps, that something
has passed between us on former occasions?’

‘Miss Summerson,’ returned my guardian, smiling, ‘has made a
communication to that effect to me.’
‘That,’ said Mr Guppy, ‘makes matters easier. Sir, I have come out of
my articles at Kenge and Carboy's, and I believe with satisfaction to all
parties. I am now admitted (after undergoing an examination that's
enough to badger a man blue, touching a pack of nonsense that he
don't want to know) on the roll of attorneys and have taken out my
certificate, if it would be any satisfaction to you to see it.’

‘Thank you, Mr Guppy,’ returned my guardian. I am quite willing --I
believe I use a legal phrase--to admit the certificate.’

Mr Guppy therefore desisted from taking something out of his pocket
and proceeded without it.

T have no capital myself, but my mother has a little property which
takes the form of an annuity’--here Mr Guppy's mother rolled her
head as if she never could sufficiently enjoy the observation, and put
her handkerchief to her mouth, and again winked at me--’and a few
pounds for expenses out of pocket in conducting business will never
be wanting, free of interest, which is an advantage, you know,’ said Mr
Guppy feelingly.

‘Certainly an advantage,’ returned my guardian.

IT HAVE some connexion,’ pursued Mr Guppy, ‘and it lays in the
direction of Walcot Square, Lambeth. I have therefore taken a 'ouse in
that locality, which, in the opinion of my friends, is a hollow bargain
(taxes ridiculous, and use of fixtures included in the rent), and intend
setting up professionally for myself there forthwith.’

Here Mr Guppy's mother fell into an extraordinary passion of rolling
her head and smiling waggishly at anybody who would look at her.

It's a six-roomer, exclusive of kitchens,’ said Mr Guppy, ‘and in the
opinion of my friends, a commodious tenement. When I mention my
friends, I refer principally to my friend Jobling, who I believe has
known me,’ Mr Guppy looked at him with a sentimental air, ‘from
boyhood's hour.’

Mr Jobling confirmed this with a sliding movement of his legs.

‘My friend Jobling will render me his assistance in the capacity of
clerk and will live in the 'ouse,’ said Mr Guppy. “My mother will
likewise live in the 'ouse when her present quarter in the Old Street
Road shall have ceased and expired; and consequently there will be no
want of society. My friend Jobling is naturally aristocratic by taste,
and besides being acquainted with the movements of the upper
circles, fully backs me in the intentions I am now developing.’
Mr Jobling said ‘Certainly’ and withdrew a little from the elbow of Mr
Guppy's mother.

‘Now, I have no occasion to mention to you, sir, you being in the
confidence of Miss Summerson,’ said Mr Guppy, ‘(mother, I wish you'd
be so good as to keep still), that Miss Summerson's image was
formerly imprinted on my ‘'eart and that I made her a proposal of
marriage.’

‘That I have heard,’ returned my guardian.

‘Circumstances,’ pursued Mr Guppy, ‘over which I had no control, but
quite the contrary, weakened the impression of that image for a time.
At which time Miss Summerson's conduct was highly genteel; I may
even add, magnanimous.’

My guardian patted me on the shoulder and seemed much amused.

‘Now, sir,’ said Mr Guppy, T have got into that state of mind myself
that I wish for a reciprocity of magnanimous behaviour. I wish to
prove to Miss Summerson that I can rise to a heighth of which
perhaps she hardly thought me capable. I find that the image which I
did suppose had been eradicated from my 'eart is NOT eradicated. Its
influence over me is still tremenjous, and yielding to it, I am willing to
overlook the circumstances over which none of us have had any
control and to renew those proposals to Miss Summerson which I had
the honour to make at a former period. I beg to lay the 'ouse in Walcot
Square, the business, and myself before Miss Summerson for her
acceptance.’

‘Very magnanimous indeed, sir,’ observed my guardian.

‘Well, sir,’ replied Mr Guppy with candour, ‘my wish is to BE
magnanimous. I do not consider that in making this offer to Miss
Summerson I am by any means throwing myself away; neither is that
the opinion of my friends. Still, there are circumstances which I
submit may be taken into account as a set off against any little
drawbacks of mine, and so a fair and equitable balance arrived at.’

T take upon myself, sir,’ said my guardian, laughing as he rang the
bell, ‘to reply to your proposals on behalf of Miss Summerson. She is
very sensible of your handsome intentions, and wishes you good
evening, and wishes you well.’

‘Oh!’ said Mr Guppy with a blank look. Is that tantamount, sir, to
acceptance, or rejection, or consideration?’

‘To decided rejection, if you please,’ returned my guardian.
Mr Guppy looked incredulously at his friend, and at his mother, who
suddenly turned very angry, and at the floor, and at the ceiling.

Indeed?’ said he. ‘Then, Jobling, if you was the friend you represent
yourself, I should think you might hand my mother out of the
gangway instead of allowing her to remain where she ain't wanted.’

But Mrs Guppy positively refused to come out of the gangway. She
wouldn't hear of it. ‘Why, get along with you,’ said she to my guardian,
‘what do you mean? Ain't my son good enough for you? You ought to
be ashamed of yourself. Get out with you!’

‘My good lady,’ returned my guardian, ‘it is hardly reasonable to ask
me to get out of my own room.’

T don't care for that,’ said Mrs Guppy. ‘Get out with you. If we ain't
good enough for you, go and procure somebody that is good enough.
Go along and find 'em.’

I was quite unprepared for the rapid manner in which Mrs Guppy's
power of jocularity merged into a power of taking the profoundest
offence.

‘Go along and find somebody that's good enough for you,’ repeated
Mrs Guppy. ‘Get out!’ Nothing seemed to astonish Mr Guppy's mother
so much and to make her so very indignant as our not getting out.
‘Why don't you get out?’ said Mrs Guppy. ‘What are you stopping here
for?’

‘Mother,’ interposed her son, always getting before her and pushing
her back with one shoulder as she sidled at my guardian, ‘WILL you
hold your tongue?’

‘No, William,’ she returned, ‘I won't! Not unless he gets out, I won't!’

However, Mr Guppy and Mr Jobling together closed on Mr Guppy's
mother (who began to be quite abusive) and took her, very much
against her will, downstairs, her voice rising a stair higher every time
her figure got a stair lower, and insisting that we should immediately
go and find somebody who was good enough for us, and above all
things that we should get out.
CHAPTER LXV - Beginning the World

The term had commenced, and my guardian found an intimation from
Mr Kenge that the cause would come on in two days. As I had
sufficient hopes of the will to be in a flutter about it, Allan and I
agreed to go down to the court that morning. Richard was extremely
agitated and was so weak and low, though his illness was still of the
mind, that my dear girl indeed had sore occasion to be supported. But
she looked forward--a very little way now--to the help that was to
come to her, and never drooped.

It was at Westminster that the cause was to come on. It had come on
there, I dare say, a hundred times before, but I could not divest myself
of an idea that it MIGHT lead to some result now. We left home
directly after breakfast to be at Westminster Hall in good time and
walked down there through the lively streets--so happily and strangely
it seemed!--together.

As we were going along, planning what we should do for Richard and
Ada, I heard somebody calling ‘Esther! My dear Esther! Esther!’ And
there was Caddy Jellyby, with her head out of the window of a little
carriage which she hired now to go about in to her pupils (she had so
many), as if she wanted to embrace me at a hundred yards' distance. I
had written her a note to tell her of all that my guardian had done,
but had not had a moment to go and see her. Of course we turned
back, and the affectionate girl was in that state of rapture, and was so
overjoyed to talk about the night when she brought me the flowers,
and was so determined to squeeze my face (bonnet and all) between
her hands, and go on in a wild manner altogether, calling me all kinds
of precious names, and telling Allan I had done I don't know what for
her, that I was just obliged to get into the little carriage and calm her
down by letting her say and do exactly what she liked. Allan, standing
at the window, was as pleased as Caddy; and I was as pleased as
either of them; and I wonder that I got away as I did, rather than that
I came off laughing, and red, and anything but tidy, and looking after
Caddy, who looked after us out of the coach-window as long as she
could see us.

This made us some quarter of an hour late, and when we came to
Westminster Hall we found that the day's business was begun. Worse
than that, we found such an unusual crowd in the Court of Chancery
that it was full to the door, and we could neither see nor hear what
was passing within. It appeared to be something droll, for occasionally
there was a laugh and a cry of ‘Silence!’ It appeared to be something
interesting, for every one was pushing and striving to get nearer. It
appeared to be something that made the professional gentlemen very
merry, for there were several young counsellors in wigs and whiskers
on the outside of the crowd, and when one of them told the others
about it, they put their hands in their pockets, and quite doubled
themselves up with laughter, and went stamping about the pavement
of the Hall.

We asked a gentleman by us if he knew what cause was on. He told us
Jarndyce and Jarndyce. We asked him if he knew what was doing in
it. He said really, no he did not, nobody ever did, but as well as he
could make out, it was over. Over for the day? we asked him. No, he
said, over for good.

Over for good!

When we heard this unaccountable answer, we looked at one another
quite lost in amazement. Could it be possible that the will had set
things right at last and that Richard and Ada were going to be rich? It
seemed too good to be true. Alas it was!

Our suspense was short, for a break-up soon took place in the crowd,
and the people came streaming out looking flushed and hot and
bringing a quantity of bad air with them. Still they were all
exceedingly amused and were more like people coming out from a
farce or a juggler than from a court of justice. We stood aside,
watching for any countenance we knew, and presently great bundles
of paper began to be carried out--bundles in bags, bundles too large to
be got into any bags, immense masses of papers of all shapes and no
shapes, which the bearers staggered under, and threw down for the
time being, anyhow, on the Hall pavement, while they went back to
bring out more. Even these clerks were laughing. We glanced at the
papers, and seeing Jarndyce and Jarndyce everywhere, asked an
official-looking person who was standing in the midst of them whether
the cause was over. Yes, he said, it was all up with it at last, and
burst out laughing too.

At this juncture we perceived Mr Kenge coming out of court with an
affable dignity upon him, listening to Mr Vholes, who was deferential
and carried his own bag. Mr Vholes was the first to see us. ‘Here is
Miss Summerson, sir,’ he said. ‘And Mr Woodcourt.’

‘Oh, indeed! Yes. Truly!’ said Mr Kenge, raising his hat to me with
polished politeness. ‘How do you do? Glad to see you. Mr Jarndyce is
not here?’

No. He never came there, I reminded him.

‘Really,’ returned Mr Kenge, ‘it is as well that he is NOT here to-day,
for his--shall I say, in my good friend's absence, his indomitable
singularity of opinion?--might have been strengthened, perhaps; not
reasonably, but might have been strengthened.’
‘Pray what has been done to-day?’ asked Allan.
T beg your pardon?’ said Mr Kenge with excessive urbanity.
‘What has been done to-day?’

‘What has been done,’ repeated Mr Kenge. ‘Quite so. Yes. Why, not
much has been done; not much. We have been checked--brought up
suddenly, I would say--upon the--shall I term it threshold?’

Is this will considered a genuine document, sir?’ said Allan. ‘Will you
tell us that?’

‘Most certainly, if I could,’ said Mr Kenge; ‘but we have not gone into
that, we have not gone into that.’

‘We have not gone into that,’ repeated Mr Vholes as if his low inward
voice were an echo.

‘You are to reflect, Mr Woodcourt,’ observed Mr Kenge, using his silver
trowel persuasively and smoothingly, ‘that this has been a great
cause, that this has been a protracted cause, that this has been a
complex cause. Jarndyce and Jarndyce has been termed, not inaptly,
a monument of Chancery practice.’

‘And patience has sat upon it a long time,’ said Allan.

Very well indeed, sir,’ returned Mr Kenge with a certain
condeseending laugh he had. ‘Very well! You are further to reflect, Mr
Woodcourt,’ becoming dignified almost to severity, ‘that on the
numerous difficulties, contingencies, masterly fictions, and forms of
procedure in this great cause, there has been expended study, ability,
eloquence, knowledge, intellect, Mr Woodcourt, high intellect. For
many years, the--a--I would say the flower of the bar, and the--a--I
would presume to add, the matured autumnal fruits of the woolsack--
have been lavished upon Jarndyce and Jarndyce. If the public have
the benefit, and if the country have the adornment, of this great grasp,
it must be paid for in money or money's worth, sir.’

‘Mr Kenge,’ said Allan, appearing enlightened all in a moment. ‘Excuse
me, our time presses. Do I understand that the whole estate is found
to have been absorbed in costs?’

‘Hem! I believe so,’ returned Mr Kenge. ‘Mr Vholes, what do YOU say?’

T believe so,’ said Mr Vholes.

‘And that thus the suit lapses and melts away?’
‘Probably,’ returned Mr Kenge. ‘Mr Vholes?’
‘Probably,’ said Mr Vholes.
‘My dearest life,’ whispered Allan, ‘this will break Richard's heart!’

There was such a shock of apprehension in his face, and he knew
Richard so perfectly, and I too had seen so much of his gradual decay,
that what my dear girl had said to me in the fullness of her foreboding
love sounded like a knell in my ears.

In case you should be wanting Mr C., sir,’ said Mr Vholes, coming
after us, ‘you'll find him in court. I left him there resting himself a
little. Good day, sir; good day, Miss Summerson.’ As he gave me that
slowly devouring look of his, while twisting up the strings of his bag
before he hastened with it after Mr Kenge, the benignant shadow of
whose conversational presence he seemed afraid to leave, he gave one
gasp as if he had swallowed the last morsel of his client, and his black
buttoned-up unwholesome figure glided away to the low door at the
end of the Hall.

‘My dear love,’ said Allan, ‘leave to me, for a little while, the charge you
gave me. Go home with this intelligence and come to Ada's by and by!’

I would not let him take me to a coach, but entreated him to go to
Richard without a moment's delay and leave me to do as he wished.
Hurrying home, I found my guardian and told him gradually with
what news I had returned. ‘Little woman,’ said he, quite unmoved for
himself, ‘to have done with the suit on any terms is a greater blessing
than I had looked for. But my poor young cousins!’

We talked about them all the morning and discussed what it was
possible to do. In the afternoon my guardian walked with me to
Symond's Inn and left me at the door. I went upstairs. When my
darling heard my footsteps, she came out into the small passage and
threw her arms round my neck, but she composed herself directly and
said that Richard had asked for me several times. Allan had found
him sitting in the corner of the court, she told me, like a stone figure.
On being roused, he had broken away and made as if he would have
spoken in a fierce voice to the judge. He was stopped by his mouth
being full of blood, and Allan had brought him home.

He was lying on a sofa with his eyes closed when I went in. There were
restoratives on the table; the room was made as airy as possible, and
was darkened, and was very orderly and quiet. Allan stood behind him
watching him gravely. His face appeared to me to be quite destitute of
colour, and now that I saw him without his seeing me, I fully saw, for
the first time, how worn away he was. But he looked handsomer than
I had seen him look for many a day.

I sat down by his side in silence. Opening his eyes by and by, he said
in a weak voice, but with his old smile, ‘Dame Durden, kiss me, my
dear!’

It was a great comfort and surprise to me to find him in his low state
cheerful and looking forward. He was happier, he said, in our
intended marriage than he could find words to tell me. My husband
had been a guardian angel to him and Ada, and he blessed us both
and wished us all the joy that life could yield us. I almost felt as if my
own heart would have broken when I saw him take my husband's
hand and hold it to his breast.

We spoke of the future as much as possible, and he said several times
that he must be present at our marriage if he could stand upon his
feet. Ada would contrive to take him, somehow, he said. ‘Yes, surely,
dearest Richard!’ But as my darling answered him thus hopefully, so
serene and beautiful, with the help that was to come to her so near--I
knew--I knew!

It was not good for him to talk too much, and when he was silent, we
were silent too. Sitting beside him, I made a pretence of working for
my dear, as he had always been used to joke about my being busy.
Ada leaned upon his pillow, holding his head upon her arm. He dozed
often, and whenever he awoke without seeing him, said first of all,
‘Where is Woodcourt?’

Evening had come on when I lifted up my eyes and saw my guardian
standing in the little hall. ‘Who is that, Dame Durden?’ Richard asked
me. The door was behind him, but he had observed in my face that
some one was there.

I looked to Allan for advice, and as he nodded ‘Yes,’ bent over Richard
and told him. My guardian saw what passed, came softly by me in a
moment, and laid his hand on Richard's. ‘Oh, sir,’ said Richard, ‘you
are a good man, you are a good man!’ and burst into tears for the first
time.

My guardian, the picture of a good man, sat down in my place,
keeping his hand on Richard's.

‘My dear Rick,’ said he, ‘the clouds have cleared away, and it is bright
now. We can see now. We were all bewildered, Rick, more or less.
What matters! And how are you, my dear boy?’
T am very weak, sir, but I hope I shall be stronger. I have to begin the
world.’

‘Aye, truly; well said!’ cried my guardian.

T will not begin it in the old way now,’ said Richard with a sad smile. T
have learned a lesson now, sir. It was a hard one, but you shall be
assured, indeed, that I have learned it.’

‘Well, well,’ said my guardian, comforting him; ‘well, well, well, dear
boy!’

T was thinking, sir,’ resumed Richard, ‘that there is nothing on earth I
should so much like to see as their house--Dame Durden's and
Woodcourt's house. If I could be removed there when I begin to
recover my strength, I feel as if I should get well there sooner than
anywhere.’

‘Why, so have I been thinking too, Rick,’ said my guardian, ‘and our
little woman likewise; she and I have been talking of it this very day. I
dare say her husband won't object. What do you think?’

Richard smiled and lifted up his arm to touch him as he stood behind
the head of the couch.

T say nothing of Ada,’ said Richard, ‘but I think of her, and have
thought of her very much. Look at her! See her here, sir, bending over
this pillow when she has so much need to rest upon it herself, my
dear love, my poor girl!’

He clasped her in his arms, and none of us spoke. He gradually
released her, and she looked upon us, and looked up to heaven, and
moved her lips.

‘When I get down to Bleak House,’ said Richard, ‘I shall have much to
tell you, sir, and you will have much to show me. You will go, won't
you?’

‘Undoubtedly, dear Rick.’

‘Thank you; like you, like you,’ said Richard. ‘But it's all like you. They
have been telling me how you planned it and how you remembered all
Esther's familiar tastes and ways. It will be like coming to the old
Bleak House again.’

‘And you will come there too, I hope, Rick. I am a solitary man now,
you know, and it will be a charity to come to me. A charity to come to
me, my love!’ he repeated to Ada as he gently passed his hand over
her golden hair and put a lock of it to his lips. (I think he vowed within
himself to cherish her if she were left alone.)

Tt was a troubled dream?’ said Richard, clasping both my guardian's
hands eagerly.

‘Nothing more, Rick; nothing more.’

‘And you, being a good man, can pass it as such, and forgive and pity
the dreamer, and be lenient and encouraging when he wakes?’

Indeed I can. What am I but another dreamer, Rick?’
T will begin the world!’ said Richard with a light in his eyes.

My husband drew a little nearer towards Ada, and I saw him solemnly
lift up his hand to warn my guardian.

‘When shall I go from this place to that pleasant country where the old
times are, where I shall have strength to tell what Ada has been to me,
where I shall be able to recall my many faults and blindnesses, where
I shall prepare myself to be a guide to my unborn child?’ said Richard.
‘When shall I go?’

‘Dear Rick, when you are strong enough,’ returned my guardian.
‘Ada, my darling!’

He sought to raise himself a little. Allan raised him so that she could
hold him on her bosom, which was what he wanted.

T have done you many wrongs, my own. I have fallen like a poor stray
shadow on your way, I have married you to poverty and trouble, I have
scattered your means to the winds. You will forgive me all this, my
Ada, before I begin the world?’

A smile irradiated his face as she bent to kiss him. He slowly laid his
face down upon her bosom, drew his arms closer round her neck, and
with one parting sob began the world. Not this world, oh, not this! The
world that sets this right.

When all was still, at a late hour, poor crazed Miss Flite came weeping
to me and told me she had given her birds their liberty.
CHAPTER LXVI - Down in Lincolnshire

There is a hush upon Chesney Wold in these altered days, as there is
upon a portion of the family history. The story goes that Sir Leicester
paid some who could have spoken out to hold their peace; but it is a
lame story, feebly whispering and creeping about, and any brighter
spark of life it shows soon dies away. It is known for certain that the
handsome Lady Dedlock lies in the mausoleum in the park, where the
trees arch darkly overhead, and the owl is heard at night making the
woods ring; but whence she was brought home to be laid among the
echoes of that solitary place, or how she died, is all mystery. Some of
her old friends, principally to be found among the peachy-cheeked
charmers with the skeleton throats, did once occasionally say, as they
toyed in a ghastly manner with large fans--like charmers reduced to
flirting with grim death, after losing all their other beaux--did once
occasionally say, when the world assembled together, that they
wondered the ashes of the Dedlocks, entombed in the mausoleum,
never rose against the profanation of her company. But the dead-and-
gone Dedlocks take it very calmly and have never been known to
object.

Up from among the fern in the hollow, and winding by the bridle- road
among the trees, comes sometimes to this lonely spot the sound of
horses' hoofs. Then may be seen Sir Leicester--invalided, bent, and
almost blind, but of worthy presence yet--riding with a stalwart man
beside him, constant to his bridle-rein. When they come to a certain
spot before the mausoleum-door, Sir Leicester's accustomed horse
stops of his own accord, and Sir Leicester, pulling off his hat, is still
for a few moments before they ride away.

War rages yet with the audacious Boythorn, though at uncertain
intervals, and now hotly, and now coolly, flickering like an unsteady
fire. The truth is said to be that when Sir Leicester came down to
Lincolnshire for good, Mr Boythorn showed a manifest desire to
abandon his right of way and do whatever Sir Leicester would, which
Sir Leicester, conceiving to be a condescension to his illness or
misfortune, took in such high dudgeon, and was so magnificently
aggrieved by, that Mr Boythorn found himself under the necessity of
committing a flagrant trespass to restore his neighbour to himself.
Similarly, Mr Boythorn continues to post tremendous placards on the
disputed thoroughfare and (with his bird upon his head) to hold forth
vehemently against Sir Leicester in the sanctuary of his own home;
similarly, also, he defies him as of old in the little church by testifying
a bland unconsciousness of his existence. But it is whispered that
when he is most ferocious towards his old foe, he is really most
considerate, and that Sir Leicester, in the dignity of being implacable,
little supposes how much he is humoured. As little does he think how
near together he and his antagonist have suffered in the fortunes of
two sisters, and his antagonist, who knows it now, is not the man to
tell him. So the quarrel goes on to the satisfaction of both.

In one of the lodges of the park--that lodge within sight of the house
where, once upon a time, when the waters were out down in
Lincolnshire, my Lady used to see the keeper's child--the stalwart
man, the trooper formerly, is housed. Some relics of his old calling
hang upon the walls, and these it is the chosen recreation of a little
lame man about the stable-yard to keep gleaming bright. A busy little
man he always is, in the polishing at harness-house doors, of stirrup-
irons, bits, curb-chains, harness bosses, anything in the way of a
stable-yard that will take a polish, leading a life of friction. A shaggy
little damaged man, withal, not unlike an old dog of some mongrel
breed, who has been considerably knocked about. He answers to the
name of Phil.

A goodly sight it is to see the grand old housekeeper (harder of hearing
now) going to church on the arm of her son and to observe-- which
few do, for the house is scant of company in these times--the relations
of both towards Sir Leicester, and his towards them. They have
visitors in the high summer weather, when a grey cloak and umbrella,
unknown to Chesney Wold at other periods, are seen among the
leaves; when two young ladies are occasionally found gambolling in
sequestered saw-pits and such nooks of the park; and when the
smoke of two pipes wreathes away into the fragrant evening air from
the trooper's door. Then is a fife heard trolling within the lodge on the
inspiring topic of the ‘British Grenadiers’; and as the evening closes
in, a gruff inflexible voice is heard to say, while two men pace together
up and down, ‘But I never own to it before the old girl. Discipline must
be maintained.’

The greater part of the house is shut up, and it is a show-house no
longer; yet Sir Leicester holds his shrunken state in the long drawing-
room for all that, and reposes in his old place before my Lady's
picture. Closed in by night with broad screens, and illumined only in
that part, the light of the drawing-room seems gradually contracting
and dwindling until it shall be no more. A little more, in truth, and it
will be all extinguished for Sir Leicester; and the damp door in the
mausoleum which shuts so tight, and looks so obdurate, will have
opened and received him.

Volumnia, growing with the flight of time pinker as to the red in her
face, and yellower as to the white, reads to Sir Leicester in the long
evenings and is driven to various artifices to conceal her yawns, of
which the chief and most efficacious is the insertion of the pearl
necklace between her rosy lips. Long-winded treatises on the Buffy
and Boodle question, showing how Buffy is immaculate and Boodle
villainous, and how the country is lost by being all Boodle and no
Buffy, or saved by being all Buffy and no Boodle (it must be one of the
two, and cannot be anything else), are the staple of her reading. Sir
Leicester is not particular what it is and does not appear to follow it
very closely, further than that he always comes broad awake the
moment Volumnia ventures to leave off, and sonorously repeating her
last words, begs with some displeasure to know if she finds herself
fatigued. However, Volumnia, in the course of her bird-like hopping
about and pecking at papers, has alighted on a memorandum
concerning herself in the event of ‘anything happening’ to her
kinsman, which is handsome compensation for an extensive course of
reading and holds even the dragon Boredom at bay.

The cousins generally are rather shy of Chesney Wold in its dullness,
but take to it a little in the shooting season, when guns are heard in
the plantations, and a few scattered beaters and keepers wait at the
old places of appointment for low-spirited twos and threes of cousins.
The debilitated cousin, more debilitated by the dreariness of the place,
gets into a fearful state of depression, groaning under penitential sofa-
pillows in his gunless hours and protesting that such fernal old jail's--
nough t'sew fler up--frever.

The only great occasions for Volumnia in this changed aspect of the
place in Lincolnshire are those occasions, rare and widely separated,
when something is to be done for the county or the country in the way
of gracing a public ball. Then, indeed, does the tuckered sylph come
out in fairy form and proceed with joy under cousinly escort to the
exhausted old assembly-room, fourteen heavy miles off, which, during
three hundred and sixty-four days and nights of every ordinary year,
is a kind of antipodean lumber- room full of old chairs and tables
upside down. Then, indeed, does she captivate all hearts by her
condescension, by her girlish vivacity, and by her skipping about as in
the days when the hideous old general with the mouth too full of teeth
had not cut one of them at two guineas each. Then does she twirl and
twine, a pastoral nymph of good family, through the mazes of the
dance. Then do the swains appear with tea, with lemonade, with
sandwiches, with homage. Then is she kind and cruel, stately and
unassuming, various, beautifully wilful. Then is there a singular kind
of parallel between her and the little glass chandeliers of another age
embellishing that assembly-room, which, with their meagre stems,
their spare little drops, their disappointing knobs where no drops are,
their bare little stalks from which knobs and drops have both
departed, and their little feeble prismatic twinkling, all seem
Volumnias.

For the rest, Lincolnshire life to Volumnia is a vast blank of overgrown
house looking out upon trees, sighing, wringing their hands, bowing
their heads, and casting their tears upon the window- panes in
monotonous depressions. A labyrinth of grandeur, less the property of
an old family of human beings and their ghostly likenesses than of an
old family of echoings and thunderings which start out of their
hundred graves at every sound and go resounding through the
building. A waste of unused passages and staircases in which to drop
a comb upon a bedroom floor at night is to send a stealthy footfall on
an errand through the house. A place where few people care to go
about alone, where a maid screams if an ash drops from the fire,
takes to crying at all times and seasons, becomes the victim of a low
disorder of the spirits, and gives warning and departs.

Thus Chesney Wold. With so much of itself abandoned to darkness
and vacancy; with so little change under the summer shining or the
wintry lowering; so sombre and motionless always--no flag flying now
by day, no rows of lights sparkling by night; with no family to come
and go, no visitors to be the souls of pale cold shapes of rooms, no stir
of life about it--passion and pride, even to the stranger's eye, have
died away from the place in Lincolnshire and yielded it to dull repose.
CHAPTER LXVII - The Close of Esther's Narrative

Full seven happy years I have been the mistress of Bleak House. The
few words that I have to add to what I have written are soon penned;
then I and the unknown friend to whom I write will part for ever. Not
without much dear remembrance on my side. Not without some, I
hope, on his or hers.

They gave my darling into my arms, and through many weeks I never
left her. The little child who was to have done so much was born
before the turf was planted on its father's grave. It was a boy; and I,
my husband, and my guardian gave him his father's name.

The help that my dear counted on did come to her, though it came, in
the eternal wisdom, for another purpose. Though to bless and restore
his mother, not his father, was the errand of this baby, its power was
mighty to do it. When I saw the strength of the weak little hand and
how its touch could heal my darling's heart and raised hope within
her, I felt a new sense of the goodness and the tenderness of God.

They throve, and by degrees I saw my dear girl pass into my country
garden and walk there with her infant in her arms. I was married
then. I was the happiest of the happy.

It was at this time that my guardian joined us and asked Ada when
she would come home.

‘Both houses are your home, my dear,’ said he, ‘but the older Bleak
House claims priority. When you and my boy are strong enough to do
it, come and take possession of your home.’

Ada called him ‘her dearest cousin, John.’ But he said, no, it must be
guardian now. He was her guardian henceforth, and the boy's; and he
had an old association with the name. So she called him guardian,
and has called him guardian ever since. The children know him by no
other name. I say the children; I have two little daughters.

It is difficult to believe that Charley (round-eyed still, and not at all
grammatical) is married to a miller in our neighbourhood; yet so it is;
and even now, looking up from my desk as I write early in the morning
at my summer window, I see the very mill beginning to go round. I
hope the miller will not spoil Charley; but he is very fond of her, and
Charley is rather vain of such a match, for he is well to do and was in
great request. So far as my small maid is concerned, I might suppose
time to have stood for seven years as still as the mill did half an hour
ago, since little Emma, Charley's sister, is exactly what Charley used
to be. As to Tom, Charley's brother, I am really afraid to say what he
did at school in ciphering, but I think it was decimals. He is
